Abstract

   Cervical cancer is one of the most common malignant tumors in
   gynecology. Deploying HIVID, a cost-effective technique to detect HPV
   integration sites, our team had studied the characteristics of HPV
   integrations in cervical exfoliated cells. Our results indicated that
   both the sample proportion and the number of HPV integrations gradually
   increased following the development of cervical lesion. Meanwhile, our
   data also revealed that there were recurrent genes integrated by HPV in
   cervical exfoliated cells. Collectively, the HPV integration
   breakpoints were highly enriched in the intron and promoter regions.
   Intriguingly, the gene pathway analysis indicated that the
   HPV-integrated genes were strongly inclined to pathways of metabolism
   of xenobiotics by cytochrome P450, chemical carcinogenesis and steroid
   hormone biosynthesis. In conclusion, this study unveiled the HPV
   integration patterns and the associated recurrent genes in cervical
   epithelial exfoliated cells. Altogether, our data suggested that the
   HPV integrations in cervical exfoliated cells might have vital clinical
   significance, and probably also diagnostic and/or prognostic values in
   future clinical applications.

   Keywords: HPV integration, Cervical exfoliated cells, Cervical cancer,
   Characteristics

1. Introduction

   Cervical cancer is one of the most common malignant tumors in
   gynecology, with an occurring incidence only second to that of breast
   cancer among all female malignant tumors. In recent years, due to the
   development of cervical exfoliative cytology, the rate of cervical
   cancer had been decreased by 70%-80%, as well as the corresponding
   mortality [38]^1. It is believed that the sensitivity and specificity
   of cervical cancer and precancerous lesion diagnosis by cytology were
   around 47%-62% and 60%-90%, respectively [39]^2. Suggesting further
   improvement of the current diagnostic mean is urgently demanded to help
   identify the high-risk group.

   More recently, HPV screening had been shown better at predicting
   cervical cancer than cytology as confirmed by an increasing number of
   studies. It is acknowledged that HPV infection could be cleared by the
   host immune system in most of women. Nevertheless, HPV infection in
   approximately 1-2% of the affected might persist and eventually leading
   to cervical intraepithelial neoplasia or cervical cancer [40]^3. The
   high-risk HPV had a clear association with the development of
   carcinogenesis. During the persist infection of the high-risk HPV, HPV
   integration events could often be detected, which were well known to
   cause genome instability, abnormal gene expression in cells
   [41]^4^-[42]^6. In addition, the viral E2 region is often being
   abrogated upon the HPV integration, resulting in uncontrolled viral
   replication [43]^7. An elevating number of research data had now
   suggested that the DNA integration of high-risk HPV might be
   pre-requisite and/or driven force of HPV-induced carcinogenesis, the
   maintenance of malignant phenotype, and the development of cervical
   cancer [44]^8. As followed by the ongoing research, the association of
   HPV integration have been established with the CIN level of the cervix,
   which could potentially being used as a marker for the cervical cancer
   risk assessment for those who suffered HPV infection [45]^9. Bearing in
   mind that most of the current research on HPV integration had focused
   and established on the pathological tissues. In clinical practice,
   cervical exfoliated cells might be collected relatively at ease
   compared to pathological tissues, providing a distinct advantage to be
   applied to generate HPV integration databases, and hence assessing the
   risks of HPV integrations. To find out the regularity of HPV
   integration in cervical exfoliated cells and also the correlation of
   HPV integration characteristics of exfoliated cells and different
   degrees of cervical lesions, we deployed the cost-effective HIVID
   detection technology. Altogether, this study had provided partial
   theoretical basis on whether HPV integration events of cervical
   exfoliated cells could have potential to be regarded as an effective
   clinical indicator.

2. Materials and Method

   A total of 230 HPV positive samples were obtained from the General
   Hospital of the People's Liberation Army (PLA). All procedures
   performed in this study involving human participants were in accordance
   with the ethical standards of the institutional research committee and
   with the 1964 Helsinki Declaration and the later amendments or
   comparable ethical standards. The study had been approved by the Ethics
   Review Committee in the General Hospital of the PLA. HPV integration
   sites were detected using HIVID method [46]^10. Functional annotation
   analysis was performed using DAVID based on Gene Ontology and KEGG
   pathway databases [47]^11^, [48]^12. The categories of KEGG Pathways
   served as background databases. The breakpoints were annotated through
   the latest ANNOVAR in hg19 coordinates [49]^13.

   It is now documented that HPV integration could affect gene expression
   in following aspects. 1. Influence flanking genes via cis-activation;
   2. mimicking the effects of cis-acting enhancers to influence target
   genes over long distances [50]^14^, [51]^15 (up to 1 Mb for upstream
   enhancers and 850 kb for downstream enhancers). In this study, genes
   located within a distance of <500kb away from breakpoints were regarded
   as the affected genes, and being assessed in the HPV-positive samples
   [52]^16.

3. Results

3.1 Analysis of Integration Ratio and Breakpoint Number

   The data analysis of these clinical samples suggested that the
   proportion of HPV integrated samples and the average number of
   breakpoints in these samples positively correlated with the stage of
   disease progression. The integration ratios of HPV infection, CINI,
   CINII, CINIII, and cervical cancer were 32%, 26%, 40%, 35%, and 77%,
   respectively. The average breakpoint numbers of HPV infection, CINI,
   CINII, CINIII and cervical cancer were 1.3, 1.4, 2, 1.8 and 3.7
   respectively. As in the samples with more advanced stages of the
   disease, the diversity of the HPV displayed a gradual decease (Figure
   [53]1).

Figure 1.

   [54]Figure 1
   [55]Open in a new tab

   Clinical annotation of 230 samples. All panels are aligned with
   vertical tracks representing 230 individuals. The data are sorted by
   the number of breakpoints, HPV infection stage, CIN stage, Cancer and
   HPV type.

3.2 The Recurrent Genes of HPV Integration in the DNA of Cervical Epithelial
Samples

   As documented in the frequency analysis, most genes only appeared once
   in the samples, despite a number of recurrent genes (Figure [56]2).
   Overall, 15 recurrent genes (frequency = 2) were filtered out from the
   HPV positive cervical epithelial samples (Table [57]S1, Table [58]S2).
   Pathway analysis revealed that the disrupted genes were enriched in the
   pathway of Metabolism of xenobiotics by cytochrome P450, Chemical
   carcinogenesis, Steroid hormone biosynthesis and so on (Table [59]S3).

Figure 2.

   [60]Figure 2
   [61]Open in a new tab

   Gene frequency of HPV integration throughout the human genomes in 230
   samples. Gene frequency of breakpoints across the human genome in 230
   samples. Each bar represents the sample frequency of HPV integration in
   the human genome (hg19). Histogram axis units represent number of
   samples. Some loci with a high frequency of integration are marked.

3.3 Distribution of Genetic Elements

   The characteristics of HPV breakpoints distribution had been surveyed.
   The results revealed that HPV breakpoints were prone to the INTRON (P <
   0.01, Chi-squared test, Figure [62]3) and PROMOTER (P < 0.05,
   Chi-squared test, Figure [63]3) regions, but not the INTERGENIC (P <
   0.01, Chi-squared test, Figure [64]3) region.

Figure 3.

   [65]Figure 3
   [66]Open in a new tab

   Distribution of breakpoints in gene element region. The expected
   (assuming uniform, random distribution, grey) and the observed (actual
   numbers, blue) ratio of HPV breakpoints in Promoter, Exon, Intron,
   Intergenic region are shown. P values were calculated by Chi-square
   test.

4. Discussion

   The cervical epithelial exfoliated cells had been widely used for early
   screening of HPV, due to its obvious advantage of being non-invasive,
   which had greatly reduced the incidence of cervical cancer. In spite of
   that the screening accuracy is yet to be improved further. The
   development of new generation of HPV screening (enrich HPV reads and
   localise HPV integration sites) had provided technical basis allowing
   the risk assessment of cervical epithelial lesions. Having provided in
   the previous studies, persistent HPV infection is the causal cause of
   cervical epithelial lesions, and the occurrence of HPV integrations
   often indicating a greater risk of epithelial lesions [67]^17^,
   [68]^18. Herein, our results suggested that the proportion of HPV
   integrated samples and the average number of breakpoints in the samples
   positively correlated with the stage of disease progression. Further
   implying that certain categories of HPV integration events could be
   good indicators of the progressive stage of developing cervical cancer.
   In fact, detecting HPV integration of cervical epithelial cells has
   gradually been practiced in clinical diagnosis and treatment. Generally
   speaking, for patients positive for HPV high-risk infection and HPV
   integration, even with negative TCT, the patients will be advised to
   carry out colposcopy examination, hence to prevent false diagnosis. For
   patients positive for HPV high-risk infection, but negative for HPV
   integration and TCT, the patients will be required to carry out
   short-term observation. In circumstances where patients are positive
   for HPV high-risk infection and integration, and biopsy of CINI, LEEP
   or cervical conization is usually recommended. For cervical cancer and
   HPV integration positive patients, it is recommended to expand the
   scope of surgery and increase the number of post-operative
   examinations. Furthermore, HPV integration hotspots and the recurrent
   genes had also been filtered out. However, it is still unclear whether
   the recurrent genes could be useful in terms of helping with prognosis.
   More interestingly, the breakpoints are significantly enriched in the
   INTRON and PROMOTER regions. Therefore, it might be directly related to
   the disruption and alteration of gene function [69]^19^, [70]^20. Gene
   pathway analysis results indicated that the HPV-integrated genes were
   significantly inclined to the metabolic and steroid hormone
   bio-synthesis pathways, and it is speculated that certain abnormalities
   in some of the metabolic and bio-synthesis pathways may be affected
   contributing to the progression of cervical cancer. In addition, HPV
   integrations had been evident to affect the cancer-associated pathways
   and modify target gene expression in the host cells, which could
   further promote carcinogenesis [71]^21^, [72]^22. Moreover, we have
   begun to conduct follow-up studies on patients with HPV integration for
   future research. It will be necessary to further determine the
   correlation of between disease progression and HPV integration.
   Meanwhile, it will provide efficient means to evaluate disease
   progression.

   In this study, deploying a genome-wide scanning method for HPV
   integrations had enabled us to determine the close correlation between
   viral integration and clinical disease progression. Our data had
   identified the inclination of HPV integration and the recurrent
   HPV-integrated genes in cervical epithelial exfoliated cells which
   might be useful in establishing a more sensitive and accurate future
   clinical application, helping with the diagnosis of HPV positive
   cervical cancer.

Supplementary Material

   Supplementary tables.
   [73]Click here for additional data file.^ (232.1KB, pdf)

Acknowledgments
