Abstract

Background

   Proteomics analysis may provide important information regarding the
   pathogenesis of chronic myofascial pain and the mechanisms underlying
   the treatment effects of dry needling.

Materials and methods

   This study used a rat model of myofascial trigger points (MTrPs) to
   perform a proteomics analysis. Three biological replicate experiments
   were used to compare the proteomes of healthy control rats, a rat model
   of MTrP, MTrP model rats following dry needling of MTrPs, and MTrP
   model rats following dry needling of non-MTrPs. Tandem mass tag (TMT)
   labeling technology based on nanoscale liquid chromatography-tandem
   mass spectrometry was used. Hierarchical clustering, gene ontology (GO)
   analysis, Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) analysis, and
   protein–protein interaction network analysis were performed to
   characterize the proteins. To validate the TMT results, three candidate
   biomarker proteins were verified using parallel reaction monitoring and
   Western blot analysis.

Results

   A total of 2,635 proteins were identified. GO and KEGG enrichment
   analyses showed that the glycolysis/gluconeogenesis pathways played
   dominant roles in the pathogenesis of chronic myofascial pain. The
   three candidate biomarker proteins were the pyruvate kinase muscle
   isozyme (encoded by the PKM gene), the muscle isoform of glycogen
   phosphorylase (encoded by the PYGM gene), and myozenin 2 (encoded by
   the MYOZ2 gene). The validation results were consistent with the TMT
   results.

Conclusion

   This is the first proteomics study that has investigated the
   pathogenesis of chronic myofascial pain and the mechanisms underlying
   the treatment effects of dry needling in an in vivo rat model of MTrPs,
   which might promote our understanding of the molecular mechanisms
   underlying chronic myofascial pain.

   Keywords: musculoskeletal pain, acupuncture, bioinformatics, mass
   spectrometry, tandem mass tag, parallel reaction monitoring

Introduction

   Myofascial pain is one of the most common types of chronic
   musculoskeletal pain in clinical medicine.[40]^1^–[41]^3 A myofascial
   trigger point (MTrP) is defined as a hyperirritable spot in a palpable
   taut band of skeletal muscle fibers, and having MTrPs is necessary to
   confirm the diagnosis of myofascial pain. MTrPs can be clinically
   classified as latent or active.[42]^1^,[43]^2 Latent MTrPs induce pain
   only on mechanical stimulation while active MTrPs cause spontaneous
   pain that is recognized as usual or familiar by the
   patients.[44]^1^–[45]^4 The histopathological and electron microscopic
   features of active MTrPs include hyperchromatic rounded contracture
   nodules, bead-like or spindle-shaped muscle fibers, and markedly
   increased levels of inflammatory cells.[46]^4^,[47]^5 An in vivo
   microanalytical technique used by Shah et al showed that the levels of
   IL-1b, IL-6, IL-8, tumor necrosis factor α, substance P, bradykinin,
   calcitonin gene-related peptide, and norepinephrine within a localized
   palpable active MTrP region in the upper trapezius muscle increased
   compared with those in subjects with latent MTrPs and in those without
   MTrPs.[48]^6^–[49]^8 Hubbard and Berkoff first described the needle
   electromyography (EMG) patterns of the upper trapezius muscle MTrP as
   two abnormal patterns involving intermittent higher-amplitude
   spike-like activity of 100–700 mV and low-amplitude persistent activity
   of 50 mV.[50]^9 This persistent and spontaneous electrical activity
   (SEA) of the MTrP was supported by further investigations in clinical
   studies[51]^10^,[52]^11 and preclinical studies.[53]^12^,[54]^13
   However, the diagnosis of MTrPs remains based solely on clinical
   examination,[55]^14 and no proteins or other biomarkers that are
   specific to MTrPs have been identified.

   Dry needling is a commonly applied intervention for MTrPs. Several
   studies have reported a significant decrease in pain intensity,
   reduction of stiffness, and improvements in the range of motion,
   functionality, and muscle strength after dry needling treatment in
   patients with MTrP pain.[56]^15 Few studies have been conducted on the
   therapeutic mechanisms underlying dry needling, particularly at a
   molecular level. Using ELISA and Western blotting, Hsieh et al
   evaluated changes in enkephalin and β-endorphin in the serum, spinal
   cord, dorsal root ganglion, and muscle induced by acupuncture at
   distant MTrPs in rabbits; this indicated that the endogenous opioid
   system could be a potential analgesic mechanism underlying MTrP pain
   management.[57]^16 The limitation was that control groups (healthy and
   MTrP model groups [MGs]) were not involved.[58]^16 Another study showed
   that the levels of acetylcholine and acetylcholine receptor were
   significantly decreased and that the level of acetylcholine esterase
   was significantly increased after dry needling of MTrPs compared with
   those after dry needling of a non-MTrP muscle region in MTrP model
   rats.[59]^13 However, there remain insufficient studies on the exact
   mechanism underlying dry needling treatment of MTrPs.

   Currently, studies on the mechanisms of MTrPs and dry needling have
   mainly focused on histopathology[60]^5 and EMG,[61]^10^–[62]^12 which
   basically stay in the verification to support the integrated trigger
   point hypothesis proposed by Simons and Travell.[63]^17^–[64]^20 In
   this hypothesis, the existence of MTrPs is classified as a
   neuromuscular dysfunction associated with long-lasting
   eccentric/concentric muscle activity that leads to two physiopathologic
   events: 1) energy depletion together with the release of sensitizing
   substances and 2) spontaneous nonquantal acetylcholine release due to a
   limited number of dysfunctional endplates. Furthermore, the exact
   change in overall proteins in the active MTrP regions (compared with
   healthy tissues) is still unknown, as is whether there are one or more
   particular proteins with key roles in dry needling-induced inactivation
   of MTrPs. As there is a complex and precise regulation system
   underlying the biological processes of MTrPs in myofascial pain,
   cross-talk between several proteins and signaling pathways may be
   involved. Therefore, it is difficult to entirely explain the pathogenic
   mechanism based on a single protein or single pathway, especially as
   there is a lack of related data from previous studies. Mass
   spectrometry (MS)-based proteomics technology has emerged as a powerful
   method to identify large-scale sets of proteins involved in many health
   conditions and treatments, including in pain control. Proteomics
   techniques may reveal novel diagnostic and therapeutic targets as well
   as potential biomarkers.[65]^21

   Taken together, this study aimed to discover the potential pathogenesis
   of myofascial pain and the therapeutic mechanism underlying dry
   needling treatment at the molecular level based on proteomics
   technology, using an in vivo rat model of MTrPs.

Materials and methods

Modeling of MTrPs

   A total of 48 male Sprague Dawley rats (220–250 g) (Shanghai Jiesijie
   Experimental Animal Co., Ltd, Shanghai, China) were housed in groups of
   three to five in a specific pathogen-free (SPF) animal experimental
   laboratory room under a 12-hour light/dark cycle. The rats were
   randomly divided into four groups using a web-based random number
   generator (Graph-Pad software) (n=12 in each group): a control group
   (CG), an MG, a dry needling of MTrPs group (DG), and a dry needling of
   non-MTrPs group (NDG). The rats in the CG group were fed as usual
   without any intervention. In the MG, DG, and NDG groups, the model of
   active MTrPs was established by blunt striking on the left
   gastrocnemius muscle and eccentric-based exercise for a period of 8
   weeks, followed by a 4-week recovery period. The left gastrocnemius
   muscle of each rat was marked and, on the first day of each week, the
   muscle was hit at the marked position using a hand-made stick device
   dropped once from a height of 20 cm with a kinetic energy of 2.352 J to
   induce muscle contusion. The rats were then made to run on a DSPT-202
   treadmill (Duanshi Co., Hangzhou, China) for 1.5 hours at a –16°
   downward angle, and a speed of 16 m/min, on the second day of each
   week.

   In our study, the diagnostic criteria for active MTrPs were as follows:
   1) tender spot in a palpable taut band; 2) elicitation of a local
   twitch response (LTR) by palpation of or needle insertion into the
   tender spot; 3) SEA features involving intermittent higher-amplitude
   spike-like activity of 100–700 mV and low-amplitude persistent activity
   of 50 mV.[66]^9 Specifically, a contracture nodule in a taut band was
   palpated and marked. An electrode needle was then inserted into the
   marked nodule. If LTRs were found to be elicited by needling, the
   marked nodule was considered as a possible active MTrP. Second, for
   confirmation, an EMG device with bipolar electrodes (Z2J-NB-NCC08, NCC
   Medical Co., Ltd, Shanghai, China) was used to verify the potential
   MTrP.[67]^13 The first needle was maintained in situ as one electrode
   and a second fine needle was longitudinally inserted 3–5 mm away from
   the first as a reference electrode. If SEAs were recorded in 60
   seconds, the model of MTrP was considered to be successful.

   The flowchart of the experimental design and procedures is shown in
   [68]Figure 1. All animal experiments were conducted at the Laboratory
   Animal Center of Shanghai University of Sport, China. The study was
   approved by the Ethics Committee of Shanghai University of Sport. The
   animal experiments complied with the ARRIVE (Animal Research: Reporting
   of In Vivo Experiments) guidelines and were carried out in accordance
   with the UK Animals (Scientific Procedures) Act, 1986, and associated
   guidelines.

Figure 1.

   [69]Figure 1
   [70]Open in a new tab

   Flowchart showing the experimental design and procedures.

   Abbreviations: CG, control group; DG, dry needling of MTrPs group;
   KEGG, Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes; LC-MS/MS, liquid
   chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry; LTR, local twitch response;
   MG, model group; MTrPs, myofascial trigger points; NDG, dry needling of
   non-MTrPs group; PPI, protein–protein interaction; PRM, parallel
   reaction monitoring; SEA, spontaneous electrical activity; TMT, tandem
   mass tag; WB, Western Blot;

Dry needling treatment

   Dry needling of MTrPs or non-MTrP regions was carried out in the DG and
   NDG groups, respectively, once a week for 4 weeks. All rats were fixed
   on a board. In the DG group, a fine needle (Ф 0.3 mm) was rapidly
   inserted and withdrawn in and out precisely at each gastrocnemius
   muscle MTrP to obtain no less than six LTRs.[71]^22 In the NDG group,
   the needle was inserted 1 cm away from each MTrP (MTrPs “neighborhood”)
   and withdrawn in and out six times with no LTRs. If there was an LTR
   elicited by accident when the needle was just inserted into the muscle
   of some rats in the NDG group, we slightly adjusted the direction of
   the needle; in these cases, no more LTRs were elicited. The rats in the
   CG and MG groups did not undergo dry needling.

Proteomics analysis

   The steps for protein preparation and TMT labeling have been submitted
   to the protocols.io repository with the following doi:
   [72]dx.doi.org/10.17504/protocols.io.upjevkn. After TMT labeling,
   liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis was
   performed. The fractionated peptide mixture was placed onto a
   reversed-phase trap column, 100 µm×2 cm (nano Viper C18) (Thermo Fisher
   Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) coupled with a C18 reversed-phase
   analytical column with an inner diameter of 75 µm, a length of 10 cm,
   and 3 µm of resin (Thermo Fisher Scientific) in 0.1% formic acid
   buffer. The mixture was separated with a linear gradient of buffer
   containing 0.1% formic acid and 84% acetonitrile. The flow rate was
   controlled at 300 mL/min using IntelliFlow Technology (Thermo Fisher
   Scientific).

   A quadrupole Q-Exactive mass spectrometer coupled Easy LLC (Thermo
   Fisher Scientific) was used to perform the LC-MS/MS analysis and the
   duration was set to 60 minutes. The instrument was run under the
   peptide recognition enablement mode. A data-dependent Top20 method was
   used to acquire the MS data. The most abundant precursor ions for
   higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD) fragmentation were
   dynamically selected from the survey scan at a speed of 300–1,800 m/z.
   The dynamic exclusion duration was set to 40 s, the maximum injection
   time was 10 ms, and the automatic gain control target was 3×10^6. The
   HCD spectrum resolution was set to 17,500 at 200 m/z (isolation width 2
   m/z, TMT 4-plex) and the resolution for survey scans was 70,000 at 200
   m/z. The under fill ratio was defined as 0.1% and the normalized
   collision energy was set to 30 eV.

   MASCOT search engine version 2.2 (Matrix Science, London, UK) with
   Proteome Discoverer 1.4 was used to search the MS/MS spectra. Filtered
   MS/MS spectra were searched against the UniProtKB Rattus norvegicus
   decoy database, including both regular and reversed protein sequences
   for false-positive rate estimation. Various parameters were set,
   including a peptide mass tolerance of ±20 ppm, variable modifications
   of oxidation (M), a fragment mass tolerance of 0.1 Da, decoy as the
   database pattern, and a peptide false discovery rate of ≤0.01. The
   protein ratios were calculated as the median of only unique peptides of
   each protein. Experimental bias was performed to normalize all peptide
   ratios based on the median protein ratio. The T median protein ratio
   was required to be 1 after normalization. Proteins with significant
   differences in expression between pairs of groups and with expression
   ratio thresholds of ≥1.2-fold increase or ≤0.83-fold decrease were
   identified. A bioinformatics analysis based on the results of the
   LC-MS/MS analysis between the CG and MG groups and the MG and DG groups
   was performed. The detailed information on the bioinformatics analysis
   has been submitted to the protocols.io repository with the following
   doi: [73]dx.doi.org/10.17504/protocols.io.upievke.

Verification of protein expression changes by parallel reaction monitoring
(PRM) and Western blot analysis

   To verify the results of the TMT analysis coupled with LC-MS/MS, first,
   PRM was performed among all proteins with differential abundance under
   in group (without pooling). Three proteins of interest were identified,
   namely, the pyruvate kinase muscle isozyme (encoded by the PKM gene),
   the muscle isoform of glycogen phosphorylase (encoded by the PYGM
   gene), and myozenin 2 (encoded by the MYOZ2 gene). The remaining sample
   of the TMT proteome was used for direct enzymatic hydrolysis. The steps
   for verification of protein expression changes by PRM have been
   submitted to the protocols.io repository with the following doi:
   [74]dx.doi.org/10.17504/protocols.io.upvevn6.

   Second, to further verify the results of the TMT analysis coupled with
   LC-MS/MS, the same three proteins of interest as for PRM were selected
   to perform a Western blot analysis. This involved using 20–30 µg of
   proteins extracted with RIPA buffer. The proteins were analyzed by
   SDS-PAGE and transferred to a nitrocellulose membrane. Subsequently,
   3%–5% dried skimmed milk powder was used to block the membranes for 1
   hour, followed by overnight incubation at 4°C with primary antibodies
   against pyruvate kinase PKM (1:2,000) (ProteinTech Inc., Chicago, IL),
   MYOZ2 (1:1,000) (ProteinTech Inc.), PYGM (1:1,500) (Abcam, Cambridge,
   UK), and glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH) (1:2,000)
   (Abcam). The membranes were then incubated for 1 hour at room
   temperature with secondary antibodies (1:2,000) (The Jackson
   Laboratory, Mount Desert Island, USA) labeled with horseradish
   peroxidase. Relative protein levels were normalized to GAPDH, which was
   used as a loading control for total protein. An enhanced
   chemiluminescence detection system was used for blot visualization, and
   an ImageQuant image analysis system was used for protein
   quantification.

Statistical analyses

   Proteomics analysis was performed in triplicate (similar results were
   obtained for at least three separate experiments), and the mean values
   were calculated. Statistical analysis was performed with SPSS
   Statistics version 20.0 (IBM Corporation, Armonk, NY) and GraphPad
   Prism software version 6.0. The data were presented as the mean±SD.
   Student’s t-test and one-way ANOVA were used to analyze quantitative
   variables and a P-value <0.05 was considered to be statistically
   significant. Gene ontology (GO) and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and
   Genomes (KEGG) pathway enrichment analyses were carried out using
   Fisher’s exact test, using the entire quantified protein annotations as
   the background dataset. To adjust derived P-values, the
   Benjamini–Hochberg correction was applied for multiple testing. Only
   categories and pathways with P-values <0.05 were considered
   statistically significant.

Results

Overall number of differentially expressed proteins

   A total of 2,635 proteins were identified and quantified overall via
   TMT coupled with LC-MS/MS. The overall number of identified proteins in
   the three biological replicates is shown in [75]Figure 2A. The number
   of distinct peptide sequences was also assessed in our study
   ([76]Figure 2B). Of these proteins, 180 (up =75; down =105) were
   differentially expressed between the CG and MG groups, 158 (up =86;
   down =72) were differentially expressed between the DG and MG groups,
   and 93 (up =62; down =31) were differentially expressed between the NDG
   and MG groups.

Figure 2.

   [77]Figure 2
   [78]Open in a new tab

   Number of identified proteins and peptide count distribution.

   Notes: (A) Venn diagram of identified proteins in three biological
   replicates. (B) Peptide count distribution of identified proteins.

Hierarchical clustering

   Hierarchical clustering analysis was performed according to the
   significantly differentially expressed proteins. The results showed
   that the selected proteins (which were significantly differentially
   expressed between groups) were well distinguished and accurately
   screened out, which provided better visualization of the overall
   proteome changes between the CG and MG groups ([79]Figure 3), and the
   DG and MG groups ([80]Figure 4). The relative expression levels are
   shown by the intensity of the color. Red, blue, or gray colors indicate
   a relative increase, decrease, or no quantitative information regarding
   protein content for a particular protein, respectively (in the rows).

Figure 3.

   Figure 3
   [81]Open in a new tab

   Significantly differentially expressed proteins between the MG and CG
   groups were well distinguished using hierarchical clustering analysis.

   Notes: Each column represents one biological replicate (from left to
   right: columns 1–3 represent the MG group; columns 4–6 represent the CG
   group). Each row represents one significant protein (180 proteins were
   found to be significantly differentially expressed; upregulated=75,
   downregulated=105).

   Abbreviations: CG, control group; MG, model group.

Figure 4.

   Figure 4
   [82]Open in a new tab

   Significantly differentially expressed proteins between the MG and DG
   groups were well distinguished using hierarchical clustering analysis.

   Notes: Each column represents one biological replicate (from left to
   right: columns 1–3 represent the MG group; columns 4–6 represent the DG
   group). Each row represents one significant protein (158 proteins were
   found to be significantly differentially expressed; upregulated=86,
   downregulated=72).

   Abbreviations: DG, dry needling of MTrPs group; MG, model group.

GO functional annotation

   As shown in [83]Figures 5 and [84]6, the horizontal axis of the graph
   represents the three categories (biological process [BP], molecular
   function [MF], and cellular component [CC] categories), while the
   vertical axis represents the number of significant proteins. The colors
   of the bar charts represent the significant enrichment of the three
   categories. The color gradient from orange to red represents the
   P-value. The more intense the red color, the lower is the P-value and
   the greater is the degree of significance corresponding to the
   enrichment. Each number above the bar charts is the richFactor
   (richFactor ≤1), which is the ratio of the number of proteins that have
   been annotated in this category. In general, the richFactor is
   positively associated with the degree of enrichment.

Figure 5.

   [85]Figure 5
   [86]Open in a new tab

   Top 20 enriched GO terms of significantly differentially expressed
   proteins between the MG and CG groups.

   Notes: In terms of BP, the top three enriched categories were: system
   process proteins (51 proteins, richFactor =0.16), muscle system process
   proteins (43 proteins, richFactor =0.25), and muscle contraction
   proteins (41 proteins, richFactor =0.28). In terms of MF, the top three
   enriched categories were cytoskeletal protein binding (34 proteins,
   richFactor =0.14), action binding (17 proteins, richFactor =0.15), and
   structural constituent of muscle (12 proteins, richFactor =0.28). In
   terms of CC, the top three enriched categories were supramolecular
   fiber, supramolecular polymer, and supramolecular complex (54 proteins,
   richFactor =0.2, each).

   Abbreviations: BP, biological process; CC, cellular component; CG,
   control group; GO, gene ontology; MF, molecular function; MG, model
   group.

Figure 6.

   [87]Figure 6
   [88]Open in a new tab

   Top 20 enriched GO terms of significantly differentially expressed
   proteins between the MG and DG groups.

   Notes: In terms of BP, the top three enriched categories were system
   process proteins (46 proteins, richFactor =0.14), muscle system process
   proteins (37 proteins, richFactor =0.22), and muscle contraction
   proteins (36 proteins, richFactor =0.24). In terms of MF, the top three
   enriched categories were cytoskeletal protein binding (33 proteins,
   richFactor =0.13), action binding (16 proteins, richFactor =0.14), and
   structural constituent of muscle (10 proteins, richFactor =0.23). In
   terms of CC, the top three enriched categories were supramolecular
   fiber, supramolecular polymer, and supramolecular complex (47 proteins,
   richFactor =0.18, each).

   Abbreviations: BP, biological process; CC, cellular component; DG, dry
   needling of MTrPs group; GO, gene ontology; MF, molecular function; MG,
   model group.

   Differentially expressed proteins between groups were further analyzed.
   The top three enriched BP categories were system process proteins (51
   proteins, richFactor =0.16, CG/MG; 46 proteins, richFactor =0.14,
   DG/MG), muscle system process proteins (43 proteins, richFactor =0.25,
   CG/MG; 37 proteins, richFactor =0.22, DG/MG), and muscle contraction
   proteins (41 proteins, richFactor =0.28, CG/MG; 36 proteins, richFactor
   =0.24, DG/MG). The top three enriched MF categories were cytoskeletal
   protein binding (34 proteins, richFactor =0.14, CG/MG; 33 proteins,
   richFactor =0.13, DG/MG), action binding (17 proteins, richFactor
   =0.15, CG/MG; 16 proteins, richFactor =0.14, DG/MG), and structural
   constituent of muscle (12 proteins, richFactor =0.28, CG/MG; 10
   proteins, richFactor =0.23, DG/MG). The top three enriched CC
   categories were supramolecular fiber, supramolecular polymer, and
   supramolecular complex (54 proteins, richFactor =0.2, CG/MG; 47
   proteins, richFactor =0.18, DG/MG).

KEGG pathway analysis

   As shown in [89]Figures 7 and [90]8, the horizontal axis of the graph
   represents the enriched KEGG pathways, while the vertical axis
   represents the number of significant proteins. The colors of the bar
   charts represent the significance of the enrichment in the three
   categories. The color gradient from orange to red represents the
   P-value; the closer to the red color, the lower the P-value and the
   greater the degree of significance corresponding to the enrichment.
   Each number above the bar charts is the richFactor (richFactor ≤1),
   which is the ratio of the number of proteins annotated in each
   category. The results showed that the top three enriched pathways
   between the CG and MG groups were glycolysis/gluconeogenesis (15
   proteins, richFactor =0.36), glucagon signaling pathway (12 proteins,
   richFactor =0.31), and hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF)–1 signaling
   pathway (11 proteins, richFactor =0.28) ([91]Figure 7). The top four
   enriched pathways between the DG and MG groups were cardiac muscle
   contraction (14 proteins, richFactor =0.29), adrenergic signaling in
   cardiomyocytes (11 proteins, richFactor =0.22),
   glycolysis/gluconeogenesis (nine proteins, richFactor =0.21), and
   glucagon signaling pathway (nine proteins, richFactor =0.23)
   ([92]Figure 8).

Figure 7.

   [93]Figure 7
   [94]Open in a new tab

   Top 20 enriched KEGG pathways of significantly differentially expressed
   proteins between the MG and CG groups.

   Notes: The top three enriched pathways were glycolysis/gluconeogenesis
   (15 proteins, richFactor =0.36), the glucagon signaling pathway (15
   proteins, richFactor =0.31), and the HIF-1 signaling pathway (11
   proteins, richFactor =0.28).

   Abbreviations: CG, control group; DCM, dilated cardiomyopathy; DG, dry
   needling of MTrPs group; HCM, hypertrophic myopathy; HIF,
   hypoxia-inducible factor; KEGG, Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and
   Genomes; MG, model group.

Figure 8.

   [95]Figure 8
   [96]Open in a new tab

   Top 20 enriched KEGG pathways of significantly differentially expressed
   proteins between the MG and DG groups.

   Notes: The top four enriched pathways were cardiac muscle contraction
   (14 proteins, richFactor =0.29), adrenergic signaling in cardiomyocytes
   (11 proteins, richFactor =0.22), glycolysis/gluconeogenesis (nine
   proteins, richFactor =0.21), and the glucagon signaling pathway (nine
   proteins, richFactor =0.23).

   Abbreviations: DCM, dilated cardiomyopathy; DG, dry needling of MTrPs
   group; HCM, hypertrophic myopathy; HIF, hypoxia-inducible factor; KEGG,
   Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes; MG, model group.

Protein–protein interaction (PPI) network

   Proteins do not exist independently in vivo, as their functions are
   associated with, or regulated by, other proteins. Therefore, we
   performed a network analysis of the target proteins using PPI. The lead
   proteins (which are differentially expressed between the CG and MG
   groups) with a high degree of connectivity in the PPI network are shown
   as red nodes in [97]Figure 9. Pyruvate kinase PKM
   (UniProtKB-[98]P11980) had the highest connectivity degree, interacting
   and connecting with 18 significantly differentially expressed proteins.
   The other four lead proteins were fructose-bisphosphate aldolase A
   (UniProtKB-[99]P05065; connectivity degree: 16 proteins),
   fructose-bisphosphate aldolase (UniProtKB-[100]Q6AY07; connectivity
   degree: 16 proteins), troponin I type 2 (UniProtKB-A0A0G2K3X1;
   connectivity degree: 14 proteins), and actin alpha (UniProtKB-D3ZCV0;
   connectivity degree: 14 proteins).

Figure 9.

   [101]Figure 9
   [102]Open in a new tab

   Top five important node proteins (marked in red) in the PPI network
   that are significantly differentially expressed between the CG and MG
   groups.

   Notes: Pyruvate kinase PKM (UniProtKB-[103]P11980; connectivity degree:
   18 proteins), fructose-bisphosphate aldolase A (UniProtKB-[104]P05065;
   connectivity degree: 16 proteins), fructose-bisphosphate aldolase
   (UniProtKB-[105]Q6AY07; connectivity degree: 16 proteins), troponin I
   type 2 (UniProtKB-A0A0G2K3X1; connectivity degree: 14 proteins), and
   actin alpha (UniProtKB-D3ZCV0; connectivity degree: 14 proteins).

   Abbreviations: CG, control group; MG, model group; PPI, protein–protein
   interaction.

PRM and Western blot validation

   Three differentially expressed proteins (pyruvate kinase PKM, PYGM, and
   MYOZ2) were selected to verify the TMT-based proteomics data using PRM.
   The PRM results showed that the three candidate proteins showed similar
   trends as in the TMT data, which supported the credibility and
   reliability of the proteomics data ([106]Figure 10). Consistent with
   the PRM results, compared with the CG group, the protein expression of
   pyruvate kinase PKM and PYGM decreased significantly in the MG group.
   However, also consistent with the PRM results, MYOZ2 significantly
   increased. After dry needling of MTrPs (DG group), the three proteins
   returned to almost normal levels (as in the CG group), which were
   significantly different from the levels in the MG group. However, there
   were no significant changes in the three protein levels between the NDG
   group (dry needling non-MTrPs) and the MG group ([107]Figure 11).

Figure 10.

   [108]Figure 10
   [109]Open in a new tab

   Expression of pyruvate kinase PKM, PYGM, and MYOZ2 in different groups
   using TMT analysis, consistent with PRM validation.

   Notes: Data are shown as the mean±SD, compared with the MG. *P<0.05;
   **P<0.01.

   Abbreviations: CG, control group; DG, dry needling of MTrPs group; MG,
   model group; NDG, dry needling of non-MTrPs group; PRM, parallel
   reaction monitoring; TMT, tandem mass tag.

Figure 11.

   [110]Figure 11
   [111]Open in a new tab

   Expression of pyruvate kinase PKM, PYGM, and MYOZ2 in different groups
   using TMT analysis, consistent with Western blot validation.

   Notes: Data are shown as the mean±SD, compared with the MG. *P<0.05;
   **P<0.01.

   Abbreviations: CG, control group; DG, dry needling of MTrPs group;
   GAPDH, glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase; MG, model group; NDG,
   dry needling of non-MTrPs group; TMT, tandem mass tag; WB, Western
   Blot.

Discussion

   Proteomics technology in the post-genome era has become an important
   branch of system biology. The concept of the proteome was first
   proposed by Wilkins at Macquarie University, Australia, in
   1994.[112]^23 Compared with the traditional single gene or protein
   study, proteomics technology shows increased reliability regarding
   disease diagnosis and more accurately reflects changes related to
   certain biological processes.[113]^24 TMT coupled with LC-MS/MS is a
   new technology, based on labeling quantification, which can precisely
   and simultaneously compare multiple samples for protein and peptide
   quantification.[114]^25 Large-scale proteomics technology can have the
   problem of quantitative false-positives, and the results usually need
   to be verified by specific detection methods. We adopted traditional
   semiquantitative Western blot analysis and precise quantitative PRM
   analysis in this study. As a targeted proteomics method, PRM was
   recognized by the journal Nature Methods as the method of the year
   2012, and it is now easily applicable to evaluate many
   proteins.[115]^26

   To the best of our knowledge, this is the first proteomics study to
   evaluate the mechanisms underlying myofascial pain and the treatment
   effects of dry needling. In this study, we used both clinical
   examination (observing a tender spot in a palpable taut band, and
   palpable or visible LTRs) and an objective tool (SEA) for identifying
   active MTrPs in a rat model. The GO and KEGG pathway enrichment
   analyses in our study demonstrated that glycolysis/gluconeogenesis was
   predominantly involved in the MTrP model and in precise dry needling
   treatment. Recently published studies using two-dimensional gel
   electrophoresis reported that many significantly altered proteins are
   important enzymes in the glycolysis/gluconeogenesis pathways in the
   trapezius muscle of patients diagnosed with widespread chronic
   pain.[116]^27^–[117]^29 Gao et al found that the
   glycolysis/gluconeogenesis/hexose metabolism pathway might play an
   important role in supporting energy and neurotransmitter homeostasis
   following electroacupuncture treatment in rats with neuropathic
   pain.[118]^30

   Another previously published study showed a significant increase in the
   dialysate lactate concentration in the MTrP region.[119]^31 Lactate is
   metabolized from glucose via the glycolysis pathway, which means that
   lactate levels are likely to be continually increased at the site of
   MTrPs until oxidative systems fully oxidize the lactate and glucose (if
   no treatment is administered). Also, the role of the
   glycolysis/gluconeogenesis pathway is in accordance with the integrated
   hypothesis put forward by Simons et al, which proposes that the MTrP
   zone is ischemic, leading to a shortage of oxygen and glucose for
   metabolism.[120]^1^,[121]^32 Glycolysis is the process of converting
   glucose into pyruvate and generating small amounts of ATP (energy) and
   NADH (reducing power), which can be oxidized through oxidative
   phosphorylation (OXPHO) to produce ATP. In contrast, gluconeogenesis is
   a synthesis pathway for glucose from non-carbohydrate precursors, which
   is essentially a reversal of glycolysis, with minor variations in the
   pathway. Any protein or enzyme in this pathway that is up- or
   downregulated will trigger a series of biological changes. In our
   study, three candidate proteins, comprising pyruvate kinase PKM, PYGM,
   and MYOZ2, were selected based on their biological functions and their
   high fold changes. Also, besides the bioinformatics results, the
   selection criteria were also based on the effect of dry needling
   treatment, which means that proteins were selected only if they were
   up- or downregulated in MTrPs, reversed in non-MTrPs, and either
   recovered after dry needling of MTrPs or showed no significant
   expression change after dry needling of non-MTrPs. The three proteins
   were verified by PRM and Western blotting, the results of which
   coincided exactly with the TMT results.

   The first candidate biomarker, pyruvate kinase PKM, had the highest
   degree of connectivity (as detected by PPI analysis), interacting and
   combining with 18 proteins that showed significantly altered expression
   between the CG and MTrP MG. Also, pyruvate kinase PKM was significantly
   downregulated in the MTrP muscle region compared with the healthy
   muscle tissue, and a study reported that it might be associated with a
   decrease in blood flow and mitochondrial dysfunction in MTrP muscle
   regions.[122]^33 All the enzymes involved in glycolysis and
   gluconeogenesis that have been identified by proteomics analysis have
   been shown to be acetylated.[123]^34 Acetylation of pyruvate kinase PKM
   decreases glycolysis/gluconeogenesis and also targets pyruvate kinase
   PKM for subsequent lysosome degradation and chaperone-mediated
   autophagy,[124]^35 suggesting that pyruvate kinase PKM has an essential
   role in the glycolysis/gluconeogenesis pathway. The findings of the
   present study may indirectly support these previous findings, as the
   up-regulation of pyruvate kinase PKM after dry needling of MTrPs could
   be explained by an increased energy requirement to support muscle
   activity, in line with the integrated trigger point
   hypothesis.[125]^17^–[126]^20 It is possible that pyruvate kinase PKM
   leads to the inhibition of glucose production and promotion of glucose
   utilization, resulting in enhanced oxygen consumption, due to
   insufficient regeneration of ATP. Therefore, inhibition of the
   degradation of pyruvate kinase PKM could further promote a shift from
   aerobic glycolysis to gluconeogenesis, and pyruvate kinase PKM may be a
   novel therapeutic target for MTrPs. This hypothesis is supported by a
   recently published study that investigated the potential role of
   pyruvate kinase isozyme M2 (PKM2) in neuropathic pain, which
   demonstrated that inhibition of PKM2 expression effectively reduced
   neuropathic pain and inflammatory responses in a rat model by
   regulating the ERK) and STAT3 signaling pathways.[127]^36 Therefore,
   pyruvate kinase PKM may be involved in several pathways to alleviate
   pain.

   The second protein biomarker identified in this study, PYGM, has been
   previously identified as being associated with McArdle’s disease
   (glycogen storage disease type V), which is the most common autosomal
   recessive disorder of glycogen metabolism.[128]^37^,[129]^38 The
   typical clinical symptoms of McArdle’s disease are muscle pain, muscle
   weakness, myalgia, cramping associated with exercise, and lack of
   physical endurance.[130]^39 PYGM is also involved in the glucagon
   signaling pathway and in starch and sucrose metabolism. In the present
   study, PYGM was downregulated in MTrPs and its expression was reversed
   in non-MTrPs and upregulated after dry needling of MTrPs, with no
   significant expression change after dry needling of non-MTrPs. Although
   further studies are still needed to determine the mechanism underlying
   the relationship between PYGM and MTrPs, the findings of this
   preliminary in vivo study using a rat model might provide the basis for
   further studies on PYGM and pain control.

   The third identified candidate protein biomarker was MYOZ2, which is
   specific to cardiac and slow-skeletal muscle fibers and has been
   identified through studies in transgenic animals.[131]^40 In
   slow-skeletal muscle, MYOZ2 is NFAT increased in slow-twitch muscle
   fibers.[132]^41 The increase of MYOZ2 mRNA expression in the rat soleus
   muscle under conditions of muscle disuse has been shown to be
   associated with the calcineurin/nuclear factor of activated T cells
   signaling pathway.[133]^42 Also, previously published studies have
   supported a role for MYOZ2 in inhibiting pathological cardiac
   hypertrophy,[134]^43 which can be provoked by exercise, resulting in
   symptoms that include chest pain, dyspnea, syncope, and palpitations.
   MYOZ2 plays an important role in the modulation of calcineurin
   signaling, and it may serve as an intracellular binding protein
   involved in linking Z-line proteins and localizing calcineurin
   signaling to the sarcomere. The findings of the present study showed
   that MYOZ2 was significantly upregulated in the MTrP model and
   downregulated following dry needling treatment. As exercise and blunt
   injury were used for MTrP modeling, the decrease of MYOZ 2 might be
   considered as a potential therapeutic biomarker of the effects of pain
   reduction after dry needling and requires further study.

Conclusion

   This in vivo study, using a rat model, is the first TMT-based
   proteomics study that has investigated the mechanism underlying
   myofascial pain and the treatment effects of dry needling of MTrPs
   using enriched signaling pathways to identify three potential novel
   biomarkers or therapeutic targets. Although the three candidate
   proteins selected in this preliminary study might not be the optimum
   protein targets, the proteomics data may provide valuable clues to
   better understand the pathogenesis associated with myofascial pain in
   order to improve diagnosis and treatment. There are several limitations
   in the present study. First, only a small number of differentially
   expressed proteins (three) were selected for further validation,
   possibly resulting in other valuable proteins being omitted. Second, a
   qualitative immunohistochemistry analysis was not performed to confirm
   the protein location in the muscles. Third, we selected male rats as
   the experimental subjects; however, both male and female subjects
   should be considered as gender-specific differences in pain perception
   are often a focus. Further, future studies are necessary to verify the
   candidate biomarkers in larger cohorts, and functional studies are
   required to dissect the roles of the pathways, as there may be a
   potential for developing new drugs based on the proteome associated
   with myofascial pain.

Acknowledgments
