Graphical Abstract

   [29]graphic file with name zjw0051959200006.jpg
   [30]Open in a new tab

   Highlights
     * Comparing proteolytic digestions and precursor fragmentation
       methods for MS of ADPr
     * Identification of 11,265 unique ADPr-modified peptides
     * Mapping of hundreds of peptides co-modified by phosphorylation and
       ADPr
     * ADPr modification of specific residue types displays spatial
       preferences

Abstract

   ADP-ribosylation is a widespread post-translational modification (PTM)
   with crucial functions in many cellular processes. Here, we describe an
   in-depth ADP-ribosylome using our Af1521-based proteomics methodology
   for comprehensive profiling of ADP-ribosylation sites, by
   systematically assessing complementary proteolytic digestions and
   precursor fragmentation through application of electron-transfer
   higher-energy collisional dissociation (EThcD) and electron transfer
   dissociation (ETD), respectively. Although ETD spectra yielded higher
   identification scores, EThcD generally proved superior to ETD in
   identification and localization of ADP-ribosylation sites regardless of
   protease employed. Notwithstanding, the propensities of complementary
   proteases and fragmentation methods expanded the detectable repertoire
   of ADP-ribosylation to an unprecedented depth. This system-wide
   profiling of the ADP-ribosylome in HeLa cells subjected to DNA damage
   uncovered >11,000 unique ADP-ribosylated peptides mapping to >7,000
   ADP-ribosylation sites, in total modifying over one-third of the human
   nuclear proteome and highlighting the vast scope of this PTM.
   High-resolution MS/MS spectra enabled identification of dozens of
   proteins concomitantly modified by ADP-ribosylation and
   phosphorylation, revealing a considerable degree of crosstalk on
   histones. ADP-ribosylation was confidently localized to various amino
   acid residue types, including less abundantly modified residues, with
   hundreds of ADP-ribosylation sites pinpointed on histidine, arginine,
   and tyrosine residues. Functional enrichment analysis suggested
   modification of these specific residue types is directed in a spatial
   manner, with tyrosine ADP-ribosylation linked to the ribosome, arginine
   ADP-ribosylation linked to the endoplasmic reticulum, and histidine
   ADP-ribosylation linked to the mitochondrion.
     __________________________________________________________________

   ADP-ribosylation is an emerging reversible post-translational
   modification (PTM)[31]^1 catalyzed by a large and diversified group of
   enzymes known as ADP-ribosyltransferases (ARTs). Based on their
   conserved structural features of the active center, the enzymes can be
   divided into two major groups: ARTCs (cholera toxin-like) and ARTDs
   (diphtheria toxin-like), also known as poly(ADP-ribose)polymerases
   (PARPs) ([32]1). Of these, the ARTCs all catalyze mono-ADP-ribosylation
   (MARylation), where one ADP-ribose moiety is transferred from NAD+ to
   the target protein. The PARPs/ARTDs constitute a larger group, with
   members able to catalyze either MARylation, or poly-ADP-ribosylation
   (PARylation), where one or more ADP-ribose moieties are transferred to
   an already protein-bound ADP-ribose. Especially the role of nuclear
   PARylation catalyzed by the PARP1 and PARP2 enzymes during the DNA
   damage response has been comprehensively studied and has led to the
   development and approval of PARP inhibitors for treatment of ovarian
   and breast cancer ([33]2–[34]5).

   Like most PTMs, the cellular abundance of ADP-ribosylation is very low,
   and further complicated by the rapid turnover of the modification in
   vivo ([35]6), making an enrichment step before mass spectrometric (MS)
   analysis necessary. An additional challenge for studying site-specific
   ADP-ribosylation is the lability of the bond between the ADP-ribose
   group and the side-chain of the modified amino acid, compared with the
   relative stability of the peptide bonds between amino acid residues.
   This, combined with the many reported amino acid acceptor sites
   ([36]7–[37]17), renders confident localization of ADP-ribosylation
   analytically challenging when using conventional MS approaches. Several
   strategies have been explored for enrichment of ADP-ribosylation, with
   each possessing distinct advantages and disadvantages. One method
   combines boronate-affinity chromatographic enrichment of
   ADP-ribosylated peptides with elution using hydroxylamine, generating a
   hydroxamic acid derivative on glutamic acid and aspartic acid residues
   with a distinctive mass of 15.0109 Da ([38]17). Although this method
   can identify a high number of sites, the ADP-ribosylation sites
   reported were exclusively observed under nonphysiological conditions
   using cellular knock-down (siRNA) of the PAR-degrading glycohydrolase
   PARG ([39]17). Moreover, a major disadvantage of this approach is the
   analytical bias toward aspartic acid and glutamic acid residues,
   because other acceptor residues cannot be identified. An alternative
   method makes use of phosphodiesterases derived from snake venom, to
   hydrolyze PAR into a phosphoribose remnant suitable for enrichment
   using well-established phosphorylation proteomics approaches ([40]18).
   Similarly, in a recently published method, hydrofluoric acid is used to
   convert ADP-ribose into ribose adducts ([41]19). Although all these
   methods are able to report ADP-ribosylation on various amino acid
   residues, they commonly lack sensitivity for in-depth characterization
   of the ADP-ribosylome, especially for investigation of ADP-ribosylation
   under physiological conditions. Besides, a major disadvantage of the
   methods described is that none of them identifies the actual
   peptide-bound ADP-ribose group, in contrary to most PTM-based
   methodologies where the original PTM remains bound to the analyzed
   peptide and therefore directly detectable by MS analysis
   ([42]20–[43]21).

   To mitigate these challenges, we have previously demonstrated the use
   of the macrodomain Af1521 for comprehensive and specific enrichment of
   ADP-ribosylation sites ([44]22–[45]25). Although this methodology
   allows for enrichment of the attached and intact ADP-ribose, the
   lability of ADP-ribosylation still constitutes an analytical challenge
   for site-specific identification when using MS-based analysis using
   higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) fragmentation ([46]22).
   Conversely, the nonergodic fragmentation propensity of electron
   transfer dissociation (ETD) fragmentation has proven superior for
   identification and confident localization of labile PTMs including
   phosphorylation ([47]26–[48]27), and we have also previously confirmed
   this for ADP-ribosylation ([49]22).

   However, one limitation of ETD fragmentation is the generation of
   dominant charge-reduced precursor ions, thus providing poorer
   fragmentation efficiency, and a bias against peptides with lower charge
   states ([50]28). Several strategies have been explored to overcome the
   limitations of ETD fragmentation, including the use of alternative
   proteases ([51]29). In shotgun proteomics trypsin is the most widely
   used protease because of the specific and efficient cleavage C-terminal
   to arginine and lysine residues ([52]30), generating peptides of an
   average length that is convenient for mass spectrometric resolution
   ([53]31). Digesting with endoproteinase Lys-C generates longer peptides
   on average carrying higher charge states, making them more suitable for
   analysis using ETD fragmentation ([54]32). Additionally, a combination
   of complementary fragmentation techniques, ETD and HCD, referred to as
   electron-transfer higher-energy collisional dissociation (EThcD), helps
   to overcome the challenge of unreacted and charge-reduced precursors
   that are often highly abundant after ETD fragmentation, while
   concomitantly obtaining b- and y-ions alongside an increase in c- and
   z-ion formation ([55]33). Notably, EThcD has proven superior for
   confident localization of labile PTMs including phosphorylation
   ([56]34) and glycosylation ([57]35) and has previously been used for
   identification of ADP-ribosylated peptides ([58]36).

   Here, we evaluated the usefulness of performing sample digestion with
   either Lys-C or trypsin before enrichment of ADP-ribosylated peptides
   using an augmented version of our Af1521 enrichment strategy, as well
   as the potential of ETD and EThcD fragmentation for localizing the
   ADP-ribose to the correct amino acid residue. Collectively, we describe
   an improved analytical MS-based proteomics strategy for enrichment,
   identification, and localization of ADP-ribosylation sites at the
   systems-wide level. By combining different proteases with various
   precursor fragmentation strategies, we report confident identification
   of >7000 ADP-ribosylation sites (localization probability >0.90) in
   cultured human cells subjected to DNA damage, representing a
   comprehensive profile of the human ADP-ribosylome.

EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES

Cell Culture

   HeLa cells (CCL-2) were acquired from the American Type Culture
   Collection, and cultured in Dulbecco's modified Eagle's medium
   (Invitrogen) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum and
   penicillin/streptomycin (100 U/ml; Gibco) at 37 °C and 5% CO[2]. Cells
   were not routinely authenticated. Cells were routinely tested for
   mycoplasma contamination. Per replicate, 100 million HeLa cells were
   cultured for the initial EThcD energy optimization experiments, and 300
   million HeLa cells were cultured for the main experiments. To induce
   ADP-ribosylation in HeLa, cells were treated with 1 mm H[2]O[2] (Sigma
   Aldrich) for 10 min in PBS at 37 °C.

Cell Lysis

   To maximize protein recovery and minimize loss of labile PTMs, we used
   a lysis procedure reliant on the chaotropic salt guanidine-HCl. After
   H[2]O[2] treatment, cells were washed twice with ice-cold PBS, and
   collected by gentle scraping at 4 °C. Cells were pelleted in a
   swing-out centrifuge with delayed deceleration at 4 °C, for 3 min at
   500 × g. PBS was decanted, and the cell pellets were directly lysed in
   10 pellet volumes of lysis buffer (6 m guanidine-HCl, 50 mm TRIS, pH
   8.5). Rapid lysis was achieved by alternating vigorous vortexing and
   vigorous shaking of the samples, for 5 s per cycle, and 30 s in total,
   after which lysates were snap frozen using liquid nitrogen. Frozen
   lysates were stored at −80 °C until further processing.

Protein Digestion

   Cell lysates were thawed at room temperature, and homogenized using
   sonication with three 15 s pulses at 30 W. Homogenized lysates were
   supplemented with 5 mm TCEP and 5 mm chloroacetamide (CAA), and
   incubated for 1 h at 30 °C. After reduction and alkylation, samples
   were split in two equal halves, and digested using Lysyl Endopeptidase
   (Lys-C, 1:100 w/w; Wako Chemicals) for 3 h, at room temperature and
   without sample agitation. After initial digestion, samples were diluted
   with three volumes of ice-cold 50 mm ammonium bicarbonate (ABC), after
   which they were allowed to slowly warm up to room temperature over a
   period of 30 min. Subsequently, half of the samples were further
   digested using modified sequencing grade Trypsin (1:200 w/w; Sigma
   Aldrich), and the other half was redigested with Lys-C, in both cases
   overnight at room temperature and without sample agitation.
   Post-digestion, samples were acidified using trifluoroacetic acid (TFA)
   to a final concentration of 0.5% (v/v). Samples were cleared from
   precipitates by centrifugation in a swing-out centrifuge at 4 °C, for
   30 min at 4250 × g. Peptides were purified by loading samples onto
   reversed-phase C18 cartridges (SepPak Classic, 360 mg sorbent, Waters),
   which were preactivated with 5 ml ACN, and equilibrated 3× with 5 ml of
   0.1% TFA. Sample loading was accelerated using a vacuum manifold,
   utilizing a low vacuum of 2/3 atmospheric pressure. After loading,
   cartridges were washed with 3× with 5 ml of 0.1% TFA, after which
   peptides were eluted using 4 ml of 30% or 40% ACN in 0.1% TFA, for
   peptides digested with either trypsin or Lys-C, respectively. Eluted
   peptides were frozen at −80 °C overnight, in 50 ml tubes with small
   holes punctured in the caps, after which they were dried to completion
   by lyophilization over the course of 96 h. Dried peptides were stored
   at −20 °C until further processing.

Purification of Af1521 Macrodomain

   To purify ADP-ribosylated peptides, we utilized a GST-tagged Af1521
   macrodomain, produced in-house essentially as described previously
   ([59]22). Competent BL21(DE3) were incubated with GST-Af1521 plasmid
   for 30 min, after which they were heat shocked at 42 °C for 45 s,
   incubated on ice for 2 min, allowed to recover for 1 h, plated on
   ampicillin LB plates, and incubated overnight at 37 °C. Four colonies
   were picked and transferred into LB media, growing overnight at 37 °C
   while shaking. The starter culture was diluted 1:20 and grown to a
   600-nm optical density of 0.60, after which protein expression was
   induced through addition of IPTG to a final concentration of 0.5 mm for
   6 h at 30 °C. Bacteria were collected by centrifugation, washed twice
   with PBS, and ultimately 100 ml worth of bacteria-containing LB was
   centrifuged per 50 ml tube. Bacterial pellets were frozen at −80 °C
   until further processing. Bacteria were lysed using BugBuster® Protein
   Extraction Reagent (Merck) according to the manufacturer's
   instructions. GST-tagged Af1521 was purified from bacterial lysates
   using glutathione Sepharose 4B beads (Sigma Aldrich). 2.5 ml of beads
   (dry volume) were incubated with the bacterial lysate for 4 h at 4 °C
   in a head-over-tail mixer, after which they were washed five times
   using PBS. Tubes were changed after the second and fourth wash steps to
   minimize contaminant carryover, and pelleting of beads was performed in
   a swing-out centrifuge with delayed deceleration to minimize loss of
   beads, at 4 °C for 3 min at 500 × g. After the final wash, 1 ml of
   beads were stored per 15 ml tube, with PBS entirely filling up the
   tube, and supplemented with 10 mm sodium azide to retard microbial
   growth. Beads were stored at 4 °C until use, for up to three months.

Reduction of ADP-ribose Polymers

   Lyophilized peptides were dissolved in IP buffer (50 mm TRIS pH 8.0, 1
   mm MgCl[2], 250 μm DTT, and 50 mm NaCl) for two replicates, and in 5×
   IP buffer (250 mm TRIS pH 8.0, 5 mm MgCl[2], 1.25 mm DTT, and 250 mm
   NaCl) for the other two replicates, to assist dissolution of
   potentially more hydrophobic peptides. However, after investigation of
   the samples no significant differences were observed between
   dissolution of peptides in 1× and 5× IP buffer, and therefore the two
   sets of two replicates were subsequently treated as one set of four
   replicates. As not all peptides dissolved at alkaline pH after being
   purified at acidic pH, samples were cleared by centrifugation in a
   swing-out centrifuge at room temperature, for 30 min at 4250 × g. The
   concentration of the peptides was determined using UV spectroscopy, and
   was ∼1/4 of the initial total protein amount. ADP-ribose polymers were
   reduced to monomers by incubation of samples with recombinant PARG (a
   kind gift from Prof. Dr. Michael O. Hottiger) at a concentration of
   1:10,000 (w/w: PARG-to-peptide), at room temperature, overnight and
   with gentle sample agitation.

Purification of ADP-ribosylated Peptides

   After overnight incubation with PARG, samples were cleared from mild
   precipitation by centrifugation in a swing-out centrifuge at 4 °C, for
   30 min at 4250 × g. Next, Sepharose beads with GST-tagged Af1521 were
   added to the samples, in a ratio of 100 μl dry beads per 10 mg sample.
   Samples were incubated in a head-over-tail mixer, at 4 °C for 3 h.
   Afterward beads were washed four times in ice-cold IP Buffer, twice in
   ice-cold PBS, and twice with ice-cold MQ water. Washes were performed
   in at least 10 bead volumes of washing buffer. After each second
   washing step, tubes were changed to minimize nonspecific carryover of
   contaminants. During the first tube change, after the second wash with
   IP buffer, all tubes were changed to 1.5 ml Protein LoBind tubes
   (Eppendorf), and LoBind tubes were used exclusively from this point on
   throughout the entire purification procedure. Loss of beads was
   minimized by pelleting beads in a swing-out centrifuge with delayed
   centrifugation, at 4 °C for 3 min at 500 × g. After washing,
   ADP-ribosylated peptides were eluted off the beads using two bead
   volumes of ice-cold elution buffer (0.15% TFA). The elution was
   performed by gentle addition of the elution buffer, gentle mixing of
   the beads with the buffer every 5 min, and otherwise allowing the beads
   to stand undisturbed on ice for 20 min. Beads were gently pelleted, and
   the elutions were transferred to 0.45 μm column filters (Ultrafree-MC,
   Millipore), standing on ice. Elution of the beads was repeated once,
   after which the second elution was pooled with the first on top of the
   0.45 μm column filter. Cotransfer of beads to the 0.45 μm filters was
   minimized, but not avoided. ADP-ribosylated peptides were then
   transferred through the filters by centrifugation in a
   temperature-controlled centrifuge at 4 °C, for 1 min at 12,000 × g.
   After clearance of the samples and removal of any remaining beads,
   further processing occurred at room temperature. 100 kDa cut-off
   filters (Vivacon 500, Sartorius) were prewashed by surface-washing the
   filters with 300 μl of 50% methanol once, spinning 2 × 400 μl of 50%
   methanol through the filters, surface-washing the filters with 300 μl
   of 0.15% TFA once, spinning 400 μl of 0.15% TFA through the filters,
   replacing the collection tubes, and spinning 400 μl of 0.15% TFA
   through the filters once more, taking care to leave a small amount of
   liquid on the filters until just before use to prevent their
   dehydration. Note that this washing procedure of 100 kDa cut-off
   filters is extremely critical as the filters are preserved in glycerin,
   of which even trace amounts can obfuscate mass spectrometric analysis
   and thus ruin the samples. 0.45 μm-cleared ADP-ribosylated peptides
   were transferred to prewashed 100 kDa cut-off filters, and centrifuged
   for 15 min at 8000 × g, to separate the Af1521 macrodomain and other
   large contaminants from the ADP-ribosylated peptides. Filtered
   ADP-ribosylated peptides were stored at −80 °C until further
   processing.

Purification and Fractionation of ADP-ribosylated Peptides

   Initial EThcD energy optimization samples were purified at low pH using
   StageTips, and all main samples were purified and fractionated at high
   pH using StageTips. For low-pH (LpH) StageTips, samples were acidified
   by addition of TFA to 1% (v/v). For high-pH (HpH) StageTips, samples
   were basified by addition of ammonium hydroxide to a final
   concentration of 20 mm. All StageTips were prepared essentially as
   described previously ([60]37), but were assembled using four layers of
   C18 disc material (punch-outs from 47 mm C18 3 m™ extraction discs,
   Empore). All buffers and samples were passed over StageTips by
   centrifugation at 1000 × g until sample loading, and at 1500 × g during
   and after sample loading. StageTips were activated using 100 μl
   methanol, and reactivated using 100 μl of 80% ACN in 0.1% formic acid
   (for LpH) or using 100 μl of 80% ACN in 50 mm ammonium hydroxide (for
   HpH). StageTips were equilibrated using 2 × 100 μl of 0.1% formic acid
   (for LpH) or using 2 × 100 μl of 20 mm ammonium hydroxide (for HpH),
   after which samples were loaded. For HpH samples, the flowthroughs were
   collected at this stage. Subsequently, StageTips were washed with 100
   μl of 0.1% formic acid (for LpH) or 100 μl of 20 mm ammonium hydroxide
   (for HpH). Next, to clean the top-end of the StageTips and the top of
   the C18 plugs, 150 μl of the respective washing buffers were added on
   top of the C18 plugs, pipetted up and down vigorously while ensuring
   the buffers reach all the way to the very top of the StageTips, and
   finally flicked out of the StageTips. This was followed by one final
   wash with 100 μl of 0.1% formic acid (for LpH) or 100 μl of 20 mm
   ammonium hydroxide (for HpH). For single-shot LpH samples, elution was
   performed at this point using 75 μl of 30% ACN in 0.1% formic acid. HpH
   samples were eluted as fractions, by sequential elution of the
   StageTips using 75 μl of 2% (F1), 4% (F2), 7% (F3), 10% (F4), 15% (F5),
   and 25% (F6) of ACN in 20 mm ammonium hydroxide. Flow-throughs from
   loading of the HpH samples were acidified using 1% TFA (v/v) and
   subsequently processed at LpH as outlined above, to generate one
   additional fraction (F0). All samples were vacuum dried to completion
   in LoBind tubes, using a SpeedVac at 60 °C for 2–3 h. Note that
   complete drying of the samples is critical for HpH samples, as any
   residual ammonia will disrupt mass spectrometric analysis of samples.
   Dried purified ADP-ribosylated peptides were dissolved by addition of
   10 μl 0.1% formic acid, allowed to stand without agitation for 5 min,
   gently tapped to aid final dissolution, briefly centrifuged to move
   samples to the bottom of the tubes, and finally stored at −20 °C until
   mass spectrometric measurement.

Mass Spectrometric Analysis

   All MS samples were measured using a Fusion Lumos Orbitrap mass
   spectrometer (Thermo). All samples were analyzed on 15-cm long
   analytical columns, with an internal diameter of 75 μm, and packed
   in-house using ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ 1.9 μm beads (Dr. Maisch).
   On-line reversed-phase liquid chromatography to separate peptides was
   performed using an EASY-nLC 1200 system (Thermo). The analytical column
   was heated to 40 °C using a column oven, and peptides were eluted from
   the column using a gradient of Buffer A (0.1% formic acid) and Buffer B
   (80% ACN in 0.1% formic acid). The primary gradient ranged from 3%
   buffer B to 24% buffer B over 50 min, followed by an increase to 40%
   buffer B over 12 min to ensure elution of all peptides, followed by a
   washing block of 18 min. Electrospray ionization (ESI) was achieved
   using a Nanospray Flex Ion Source (Thermo). Spray voltage was set to 2
   kV, capillary temperature to 275 °C, and RF level to 30%. Full scans
   were performed at a resolution of 60,000, with a scan range of 300 to
   1750 m/z, a maximum injection time of 60 ms, and an automatic gain
   control (AGC) target of 600,000 charges. Precursors were isolated with
   a width of 1.3 m/z, with an AGC target of 200,000 charges, and
   precursor fragmentation was accomplished using either electron transfer
   dissociation (ETD) or electron transfer disassociation with
   supplemental higher-collisional disassociation (EThcD), using
   calibrated charge-dependent ETD parameters. For EThcD evaluation,
   supplemental activation energies of 10, 15, 20, and 25 were used, and a
   setting of 20 was used for all main experiments. Even though the
   Orbitrap was exclusively used as the mass detector, both the ion trap
   and the Orbitrap were calibrated and evaluated in positive and negative
   mode. For ETD, Reagent Transmission, IC Transmission, and Reagent Ion
   Source were all calibrated and evaluated on a weekly basis. Calibration
   of charge-dependent ETD parameters was essentially performed as
   described previously ([61]38). Charge-dependent ETD calibration
   resulted in ETD activation times of 46.42 ms for z = 3 precursors,
   26.11 ms for z = 4 precursors, and 16.71 ms for z = 5 precursors. This
   equates to an ETD Time Constant (τ) of 2.32. Precursors with charge
   state 3–5 were isolated for MS/MS analysis, and prioritized from charge
   3 (highest) to charge 5 (lowest), using the decision tree algorithm.
   Selected precursors were excluded from repeated sequencing by setting a
   dynamic exclusion of 48 s. MS/MS spectra were measured in the Orbitrap,
   with a loop count setting of 5, a maximum precursor injection time of
   120 ms, and a scan resolution of 60,000.

Data Analysis

   Analysis of the mass spectrometry raw data was performed using MaxQuant
   software (version 1.5.3.30). For both the EThcD energy optimization
   data search and the main data search, default MaxQuant settings were
   used, with exceptions outlined below. For generation of the theoretical
   spectral library, a HUMAN.fasta database was extracted from UniProt on
   the 10th of July, 2018. The HUMAN.fasta database contained 95,086
   protein entries, based on SwissProt and TrEMBL, and contained both
   canonical sequences and isoforms. N-terminal acetylation, methionine
   oxidation, cysteine carbamidomethylation, phosphorylation (S, T, and
   Y), and ADP-ribosylation on all amino acid residues known to
   potentially be modified (C, D, E, H, K, R, S, T, and Y), were included
   as variable modifications. For analysis of trypsin samples, up to 6
   missed cleavages were allowed. For analysis of Lys-C samples, up to 3
   missed cleavages were allowed. A maximum allowance of 4 variable
   modifications per peptide was used. The number of modified peptide
   entries in the search space generated by MaxQuant was 180,948,313 for
   the trypsin search space, and 50,914,084 for the Lys-C search space.
   Second peptide search was enabled (default) and matching between runs
   was enabled with a match time window of 1 min and an alignment time
   window of 20 min. Mass tolerance for precursors was set to 20 ppm in
   the first MS/MS search and 4.5 ppm in the main MS/MS search after mass
   recalibration. For fragment ion masses, a tolerance of 20 ppm was used.
   Modified peptides were filtered to have an Andromeda score of >40
   (default), and a delta score of >20. Data was automatically filtered by
   posterior error probability to achieve a false discovery rate of <1%
   (default), at the peptide-spectrum match, the protein assignment, and
   the site-specific levels.

Data Filtering

   Beyond automatic filtering and FDR control as applied by MaxQuant, the
   data was manually filtered to ensure proper identification and
   localization of ADP-ribose. PSMs modified by more than one ADP-ribose
   were only rarely observed and omitted. PSMs corresponding to unique
   peptides were only used for ADP-ribosylation site assignment if
   localization probability was >0.90, with localization of >0.75 accepted
   only for purposes of intensity assignment of further evidences for
   unique peptides already localized with at least one >0.90 evidence.
   Because default MaxQuant intensity assignments to modification sites
   also include nonlocalized or poorly localized evidences, intensities
   were manually mapped back to the sites table based on localized PSMs
   only (>0.90 best-case, >0.75 for further evidences). For the
   ADP-ribosylation target proteins table, the proteinGroups.txt file
   generated by MaxQuant was filtered to only contain those proteins with
   at least one ADP-ribosylation site detected and localized
   post-filtering as outlined above, with cumulative ADP-ribosylation site
   intensities based only on localized evidences.

Comparison to Other Studies

   Data from other studies was retrieved from several publications and
   online databases. For ADP-ribosylation sites; Larsen et al. ([62]22),
   Bonfiglio et al. ([63]16), Bilan et al. ([64]36), Leslie Pedrioli et
   al. ([65]39). For ADP-ribosylation proteins; Zhang et al. ([66]17),
   Jungmichel et al. ([67]40), Martello et al. ([68]25), Bilan et al.
   ([69]36), Larsen et al. ([70]22). For total proteome; Bekker-Jensen et
   al. ([71]41). For phosphorylation sites; Larsen et al. ([72]22) and
   PhosphoSitePlus ([73]42). For comparison of proteins between studies,
   all protein identifiers were mapped to the human proteome as downloaded
   from Uniprot on the 10th of July, 2018. In case data sources did not
   include Uniprot IDs, ID mapping on Uniprot was used to convert other
   IDs to Uniprot IDs, and otherwise gene names were used. Nonexistent,
   nonhuman, or redundant entries, were discarded from the analysis. For
   comparison of sites between studies, all parent proteins were mapped to
   Uniprot IDs as described above, and afterward the reported positions of
   modification were used to extract 51 amino acid sequence windows
   (modified residue ± 25 amino acids), with the sequence windows
   ultimately used to directly compare identified sites. Sites mapping to
   nonexistent, nonhuman, or redundant proteins, were discarded. Sites not
   correctly aligning to the reported amino acid residues were manually
   corrected in case the modified peptide sequences were available, and
   otherwise discarded. For generation of the intensity dynamic range
   plot, all protein intensity values were retrieved from the respective
   studies, log[2] transformed, and the maximum value was subtracted from
   all other values to have the maxima of all studies align at “0” depth.
   To minimize interference of data variance at the high end of the
   intensity scale, standard deviations were calculated over sets of 10
   values, and the first value where the S.D. with the next nine values
   was <0.2 was considered the maximum intensity value.

Experimental Design and Statistical Rationale

   The purpose of these experiments was to improve mass spectrometric
   detection of ADP-ribosylated peptides and corresponding acceptor sites,
   in an attempt to better understand the biological targets and mechanism
   of action of this emerging PTM. For the outlined experiments only human
   cell culture was used, and for the analyses four biological replicates
   were used.

Statistical Analysis

   Details regarding the statistical analysis can be found in the
   respective figure legends. Statistical handling of the data was
   primarily performed using the freely available Perseus software
   ([74]43), and includes term enrichment analysis through FDR-controlled
   Fisher Exact testing. Protein annotations used for term enrichment
   analysis, including Gene Ontology, UniProt keywords, Pfam, InterPro,
   and CORUM, were concomitantly downloaded from UniProt with the
   HUMAN.fasta file used for searching the RAW data. Boxplots were
   generated using the BoxPlotR web tool ([75]44). The iceLogo software
   (version 2.1) was used for sequence motif analysis ([76]45), and for
   all sequence comparisons, background sequences were extracted from the
   same proteins and flanking the same amino acid residue type. The
   Motif-x R package ([77]46) was used for additional sequence motif
   analysis. Known kinase-regulated sites were extracted from
   PhosphoSitePlus ([78]42). The online STRING database (version 10.5) was
   used for generation of protein interaction networks ([79]47), and
   Cytoscape (version 3.7.0) was used for manual annotation and
   visualization of the STRING networks ([80]48).

RESULTS

   To enable comprehensive and robust profiling of ADP-ribosylation, we
   initially set out to optimize our established proteomics methodology.
   To this end, we relied on our peptide-level enrichment strategy, which
   includes reduction of poly-ADP-ribose (PAR) to monomers (MAR) using the
   PAR glycohydrolase (PARG) enzyme, followed by purification of the
   ADP-ribosylated peptides using the Af1521 macrodomain ([81]22, [82]25).
   Importantly, we sought to optimize the protocol to make it
   experimentally more robust, and achieve the highest degree of peptide
   purity ([83]Fig. 1A). Key improvements include a hydrophilic
   purification of the protein digest, followed by lyophilization to
   maximize recovery of peptides that harbor ADP-ribosylation while
   eliminating large hydrophobic molecules. Following PARG treatment of
   the samples and subsequent ADP-ribosylation enrichment using Af1521, we
   incorporated a size-exclusion filtering step to remove the Af1521
   macrodomain from the elutions, which is the major contaminant in
   previous Af1521 experiments ([84]25). Finally, high-pH fractionation of
   the remaining peptides reduced sample complexity, and moreover served
   as a final purification step owing to the unique hydrophilic nature of
   ADP-ribosylated peptides (detailed under Experimental Procedures
   section).

Fig. 1.

   [85]Fig. 1.
   [86]Open in a new tab

   Optimized proteomics methodology for deep profiling of the
   ADP-ribosylome. A, Overview of the general experimental workflow used
   for purification of ADP-ribosylated peptides. Sample preparation starts
   with lysis of the starting material, which was cultured human cells,
   but can in principle also be tissue material or samples derived from
   other model organisms. Lysis and homogenization is performed in
   guanidine buffer, to denature all proteins and preserve labile PTMs,
   and followed by digestion of the proteins by either trypsin or Lys-C.
   Subsequently, hydrophilic peptides are purified through reversed-phase
   chromatography, and salts as well as larger particulates such as
   partially digested proteins and other contaminants are excluded at this
   stage. Purified peptides are lyophilized to maximize their recovery and
   dissolved in a mild buffer to facilitate efficient reduction of
   ADP-ribose polymers with the PARG enzyme. The same buffer enables
   efficient enrichment of ADP-ribosylated peptides using the Af1521
   macrodomain, which is afterward removed using a size-exclusion
   filtration step that removes large polypeptides. The final step in the
   sample preparation is clean-up using StageTips, optionally with
   on-StageTip high-pH reversed-phase fractionation to reduce sample
   complexity. Purified ADP-ribosylated peptides may then be analyzed
   using mass spectrometry, ideally using ETD-type precursor fragmentation
   to correctly localize the ADP-ribose. B, The experimental design for
   this study. Cell cultures were performed in quadruplicate; n = 4, and
   all cells were treated with H[2]O[2] to induce ADP-ribosylation. C,
   Overview of the total number of sites identified in this study, as well
   as the numbers reported by previous ADP-ribosylation proteomics studies
   ([87]17, [88]22–[89]23, [90]25, [91]36). Note that these numbers are
   irrespective of the different purification methods and bioinformatics
   approaches used. D, Depth of sequencing analysis, inferred through
   known copy-numbers for proteins identified to be ADP-ribosylated in
   this study, and in various other studies ([92]17, [93]22, [94]25,
   [95]36, [96]40). The analysis is qualitative, because of differences in
   experimental design between the compared studies. Protein copy-numbers
   were derived from a recent deep HeLa proteome study ([97]41), which
   covers the vast majority (>99%) of all ADP-ribosylated proteins
   identified. The width of the boxplots (for ADP-ribosylation studies)
   and the numbers set above the horizontal axis correspond to the number
   of proteins identified. Whiskers; 95^th and 5^th percentiles, box
   limits; 3^rd and 1^st quartiles, center bar; median. Significance of
   differences between depth of sequencing was assessed by Student's
   two-tailed t-testing, blue and red asterisks indicate that our study
   achieved more or less depth, respectively. * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.001.

   To achieve a greater depth and width of ADP-ribosylation sequencing, we
   expanded our core experimental workflow in two ways ([98]Fig. 1B).
   First, we performed initial digestion of proteins either using trypsin
   or the endoproteinase Lys-C. Unlike trypsin, Lys-C does not cleave
   C-terminal of arginines, thus resulting in a different peptide
   composition. Second, samples were analyzed using either
   electron-transfer disassociation (ETD) or using ETD with supplemental
   higher-collisional dissociation (EThcD). In all cases, experiments were
   carried out using quadruplicate HeLa cell cultures, which were all
   subjected to treatment with hydrogen peroxide, and all samples were
   high-pH fractionated before analysis, as described previously ([99]22).

   Before analyzing our main samples, we set out to investigate a suitable
   level of supplemental activation energy for EThcD fragmentation of
   ADP-ribose-modified peptides. To this end, we enriched ADP-ribosylated
   peptides from HeLa cells either mock treated or treated with hydrogen
   peroxide, using our established workflow ([100]supplemental Fig. S1A).
   Following purification, samples were split in half, and analyzed
   back-to-back using either pure ETD or EThcD at increasing levels of
   supplemental activation energy ([101]supplemental Fig. S1B). Overall,
   we observed an increasing propensity for EThcD to successfully localize
   ADP-ribosylation on peptides when using higher energies. However, when
   increasing energy over 20, peptide scores decreased and fewer
   ADP-ribose-modified peptides could be identified. Thus, EThcD with a
   supplemental activation setting of 20 was used for all main
   experiments.

In-depth Profiling of the Human ADP-Ribosylome

   All ADP-ribosylation samples were analyzed using an Orbitrap Fusion
   Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer with either ETD or EThcD fragmentation
   ([102]Fig. 1A–[103]1B), and all data was processed in a single
   computational run using semi-restricted search settings ([104]22).
   Importantly, our experimental methodology in combination with
   ETD-driven peptide fragmentation allows for unbiased and accurate
   assignment of the ADP-ribose group to any of the nine reactive amino
   acid residues that have been reported previously.

   In total, we identified 11,265 unique ADP-ribose-modified peptides
   ([105]supplemental Table S1), mapping to 7040 unique ADP-ribosylation
   sites ([106]supplemental Table S2), across 2149 human proteins
   ([107]Fig. 1C and [108]supplemental Table S3). To assess the
   qualitative depth of sequencing we linked identified ADP-ribosylation
   target proteins with their established protein copy-numbers ([109]41)
   and found that our human ADP-ribosylome is significantly deeper than
   most previously published studies ([110]Fig. 1D). Although we did not
   significantly increase depth of sequencing compared with our most
   recent study ([111]22), we nonetheless increased the number of
   identified ADP-ribosylation sites and ADP-ribosylated proteins by ∼100%
   and ∼50%, respectively. The dynamic range of ADP-ribosylated protein
   intensities measured across our experiments spanned nearly six orders
   of magnitude ([112]supplemental Fig. S1C), in line with most recent
   deep proteome studies, and overall highlighting the analytical
   challenge of proteomic analysis of PTMs, which often populate a very
   large dynamic range. With most ADP-ribosylated target proteins residing
   within the nucleus ([113]supplemental Fig. S1F), our data collectively
   outlines that ADP-ribosylation can modify over one-third of all known
   nuclear proteins.

   Both enzymatic and fragmentation approaches proved highly reproducible
   ([114]Fig. 2A), and succeeded in identifying and localizing thousands
   of ADP-ribosylated peptides. In general, MS/MS spectra resulting from
   pure ETD fragmentation received higher Andromeda scores and delta
   scores ([115]supplemental Fig. S2A), with EThcD more frequently
   identifying peptides with higher mass and higher mass-over-charge (m/z)
   ([116]supplemental Figs. S2B–S2C). Outside of peptide mass, these
   properties were not significantly different between peptides derived
   from trypsin or Lys-C digestion. However, when considering peptides
   uniquely identified by either pure ETD or EThcD ([117]supplemental Fig.
   S2D), we found that EThcD outperformed ETD.

Fig. 2.

   [118]Fig. 2.
   [119]Open in a new tab

   In-depth profiling of the human ADP-ribosylome. A, Overview of the
   number of unique ADP-ribosylated peptides identified and localized
   across the four different experimental conditions. Error bars represent
   S.D., n = 4 cell culture replicates. B, ADP-ribose localization
   probability plotted against the ranked fraction of all
   peptide-spectrum-matches (PSMs) resulting from the four different
   approaches. Note that although all probabilities are displayed, only
   those over 0.9 were used for assignment of ADP-ribosylated peptides and
   sites. C, Peptide bond coverage analysis, which demonstrates the
   fraction of the maximum number of peptide bonds for which peptide bonds
   were fragmented, and for which peaks were detected and assigned.
   Whiskers; 1.5× interquartile range (IQR), box limits; 3^rd and 1^st
   quartiles, center bar; median. Numbers set above the horizontal axis
   correspond to the number of identified ADP-ribosylation PSMs. D, Venn
   diagram depicting the distribution of unique ADP-ribosylated peptides
   identified across the four different approaches. E, As D, but for
   unique ADP-ribosylation sites. F, Overview of the number of
   ADP-ribosylation sites per protein, plotted against the total number of
   identified proteins ranked by site number. G, Scaled Venn diagram
   visualizing distribution of identified ADP-ribosylation sites in this
   study compared with other ADP-ribosylation studies ([120]16, [121]22,
   [122]36). “Other studies”; Bilan et al., and Bonfiglio et al. For this
   comparison, only studies using unbiased purification methods, and
   unrestricted or semi-restricted database searches, were considered. H,
   Scaled Venn diagram visualizing distribution of identified
   ADP-ribosylation target proteins in this study, compared with other
   ADP-ribosylation proteomics studies ([123]16–[124]17, [125]22, [126]25,
   [127]36). “Other studies”; Zhang et al., Martello et al., Bilan et al.,
   and Bonfiglio et al. I, Term enrichment analysis using Gene Ontology
   annotations, comparing proteins identified to be ADP-ribosylated to the
   total proteome. Relative score is derived from multiplication of
   logarithms derived from the enrichment ratio and the q-value. All
   displayed terms were significant with q<0.02, as determined through
   Fisher Exact Testing with Benjamini-Hochberg correction. “MF”;
   Molecular Functions, “CC”; Cellular Compartments, “BP”; Biological
   Processes. J, As I, but using CORUM and InterPro annotations.

   Overall, EThcD resulted in a higher number of identified
   ADP-ribosylated peptides, and EThcD was also more successful in
   localizing the modification to the correct amino acid ([128]Fig. 2A).
   Especially in case of the Lys-C samples, which naturally contained
   larger and thus harder-to-resolve peptides, EThcD outperformed pure ETD
   ([129]Fig. 2B). On investigation of all fragment ions contained within
   the MS/MS spectra, we did not observe a significant difference in
   average ion series coverage between ETD and EThcD ([130]supplemental
   Fig. S2E). However, EThcD demonstrated increased peptide bond coverage
   ([131]Fig. 2C), frequently covering >90% of all peptide bonds, and thus
   providing additional spectral evidence for true localization of
   ADP-ribosylation. We reason that the additional bond coverage is a
   direct result of the higher-collisional dissociation property of EThcD,
   which would be more likely to break specific bonds that would be
   resistant to pure ETD ([132]33).

   When considering the contribution of each experiment to the total
   number of ADP-ribosylation peptides and sites identified ([133]Fig.
   2D–[134]2E), we noted that the usage of trypsin and Lys-C resulted in
   highly complementary data. At the peptide level, 84.1% of all
   identifications were unique to either trypsin or Lys-C
   ([135]supplemental Table S1), which remained 67.4% at the
   ADP-ribosylation site level ([136]supplemental Table S2). Compared with
   trypsin and Lys-C, the overlap between ETD and EThcD was much larger,
   with EThcD providing most of the unique identifications.

   In total, we identified 2149 human proteins to be modified by
   ADP-ribosylation, with 57% modified on two or more sites ([137]Fig. 2F
   and [138]supplemental Table S3). Ten or more ADP-ribosylation sites
   were mapped for 129 proteins, with the most sites identified on MKI67,
   harboring 91 sites in total. We identified 82 and 81% of modified sites
   and proteins reported in previous human ADP-ribosylation proteomics
   studies ([139]Fig. 2G–[140]2H, [141]supplemental Tables S4 and S5), and
   additionally mapped 4160 ADP-ribosylation sites and 782
   ADP-ribosylation target proteins that have not been previously
   reported. Gene Ontology term enrichment analysis demonstrated that our
   expanded ADP-ribosylome corroborates the known functions of
   ADP-ribosylation ([142]supplemental Table S6), with highly significant
   hits for nuclear localization, the DNA damage response, RNA metabolism,
   and chromatin remodeling ([143]Fig. 2I and [144]supplemental Fig. S2F).
   Term enrichment analysis for protein complexes and structural domains
   showed frequent ADP-ribosylation of DNA binding proteins, helicases,
   the spliceosome, the ribosome, and histones ([145]Fig. 2J).

Targeting Preference of ADP-ribosylation

   Because of the increased sequencing depth achieved through our extended
   analysis, we were able to profile the amino acid specificity of
   ADP-ribosylation to an unparalleled degree. The frequent modification
   of serine residues by ADP-ribosylation has recently been uncovered
   ([146]22, [147]36, [148]51), and we sought to validate whether the
   differential enzymatic digestions or fragmentation methods used here
   had any bearing on these observations. Overall, the ADP-ribosylome
   profiled here largely corroborates the dominant targeting to serine
   residues ([149]Fig. 3A), with 88.7% of modifications occurring on
   serine residues, accounting for 97.2% of the measured ADP-ribosylation
   intensity ([150]supplemental Table S2). Intriguingly, the three
   next-most abundantly modified amino acid residues were arginine,
   tyrosine, and histidine, with over a hundred sites detected and
   localized for each.

Fig. 3.

   [151]Fig. 3.
   [152]Open in a new tab

   Targeting preference of ADP-ribosylation. A, Pie-chart overview of the
   amino acid residue distribution of ADP-ribosylation sites (left
   pie-chart) and the distribution of ADP-ribosylation peptide peak
   intensity (top-right pie-chart). The bottom-right pie-chart represents
   a close-up of the 2.82% ADP-ribosylation intensity not occurring on
   serine residues. B, Overview of the fraction of serine residues
   modified by ADP-ribosylation, in total and across several selections of
   ADP-ribosylation sites. Total numbers of ADP-ribosylation sites
   identified per selection are displayed above the bars. C, IceLogo
   representation of the sequence context surrounding serine
   ADP-ribosylation sites. Amino acid residues displayed above the line
   were enriched, and those displayed below were depleted, compared with
   the sequence context of all serine residues derived from the same
   proteins. All displayed amino acids indicate significant changes as
   determined by two-tailed Student's t-testing, n = 6245 serine
   ADP-ribosylation sites, p < 0.05. D, Overview of the fraction of serine
   ADP-ribosylation sites residing in KS motifs, in total and across
   several selections of ADP-ribosylation sites. Total numbers of serine
   ADP-ribosylation sites identified per selection are displayed above the
   bars. E, Schematic depiction of the cumulative abundance of the
   ADP-ribosylome derived from ADP-ribosylation sites ranked by their peak
   intensities, with the total average and 500-site sliding window
   adherence to the KS motif plotted alongside. F, Distribution of the
   fractional contribution of individual ADP-ribosylation sites to the
   total modification of the protein, for ADP-ribosylation sites not
   residing in KS motifs, all ADP-ribosylation sites, or ADP-ribosylation
   sites residing in KS motifs. Whiskers; 1.5× interquartile range (IQR),
   box limits; 3^rd and 1^st quartiles, center bar; median, + symbol;
   average. Numbers set above the top whisker correspond to the total
   number of serine ADP-ribosylation sites per grouping.

   ADP-ribosylation sites identified through multiple modes of detection,
   i.e. with both fragmentation modes or with both enzymes, demonstrated
   an even higher adherence to serine residues ([153]Fig. 3B). We did not
   observe any large deviations in amino acid distribution for
   ADP-ribosylation sites detected exclusively in one experimental
   condition, except the relatively few ADP-ribosylation sites exclusively
   detected by ETD, where only 67.0% of modifications occurred on serine.
   Taken together, all methods investigated here highlight serine residues
   as the major ADP-ribosylation acceptor site.

   As a second parameter for evaluation of technical performance, we
   assessed the sequence context surrounding the serine residues
   ([154]Fig. 3C). Primarily, lysine residues at the −1 position of the
   ADP-ribosylated serine residues, the so-called KS motifs, were highly
   prevalent in our data. We used Motif-X to assess the prevalence of
   statistically significant motifs surrounding serine residues
   ([155]supplemental Fig. S3), which primarily demonstrated enrichment
   for lysine residues at the −1 position. Although glycine residues
   appear commonly nearby ADP-ribosylation sites, this can in part be
   attributed to the abundance of proteins containing these motifs
   ([156]22), unlike KS motifs. When considering the detection of KS
   motifs across the investigated experimental conditions, we observed
   28.2% of all ADP-ribosylation sites to reside in KS motifs ([157]Fig.
   3D), rising to 30.2% or 32.9% when considering those detected through
   both fragmentation modes or both enzymatic digestions, respectively. In
   terms of ADP-ribosylation sites exclusive to specific experimental
   conditions, those detected solely by ETD only adhered 18.7% to KS
   motifs, and those detected exclusively through LysC only adhered 21.7%
   to KS motifs.

   Globally, when ranking ADP-ribosylation sites by their abundance, we
   found that the dynamic range of the ADP-ribosylome is very steep, with
   nearly two-third of ADP-ribosylation residing on the top 1%
   most-abundantly modified sites ([158]Fig. 3E and [159]supplemental
   Table S2), and 92% of ADP-ribosylation residing on the top 10%
   most-modified sites. ADP-ribosylated serine residues in KS motifs
   frequently accounted for the most highly modified ADP-ribosylation
   sites ([160]Fig. 3E), with a steadily descending adherence across the
   one-third top-abundant sites. We analyzed the fractional contribution
   of individual ADP-ribosylation sites to the total modification of the
   respective proteins ([161]supplemental Table S2), and used this
   information to investigate the intra-protein targeting of
   ADP-ribosylation to KS motifs ([162]Fig. 3F). Here, we observed that
   multiply-modified proteins that are ADP-ribosylated both on and outside
   of KS motifs, were significantly higher modified on KS motifs,
   suggesting a direct regulatory role for these motifs in attracting a
   high degree of ADP-ribosylation.

Crosstalk Between Serine ADP-ribosylation and Phosphorylation

   With ADP-ribosylation and phosphorylation both intricately involved in
   regulation of cellular signaling, and able to modify a similar range of
   amino acid residues, we investigated our expansive repertoire of
   ADP-ribosylation sites for crosstalk between the two PTMs. Importantly,
   crosstalk can overall be divided into two categories ([163]Fig. 4A).
   First, co-targeting of the PTMs to the exact same residue, which is
   usually competitive but can also be sequential ([164]52–[165]53).
   Second, co-modification of the protein by both PTMs simultaneously,
   which is usually cooperative and sequential.

Fig. 4.

   [166]Fig. 4.
   [167]Open in a new tab

   Crosstalk between ADP-ribosylation and phosphorylation. A,
   Visualization of two distinct types of PTM crosstalk, either
   co-targeting or co-modification. B, Scaled Venn diagram visualizing
   overlap between serine ADP-ribosylation sites identified in this study,
   and serine phosphorylation identified in a previous study ([168]22), or
   those identified by 2+ studies in the literature, as derived from
   PhosphoSitePlus (PSP) ([169]42). C, PTM co-targeting enrichment
   analysis, visualizing overlap between top intensity serine
   ADP-ribosylation sites identified in this study with known serine
   phosphorylation sites, known kinase-regulated sites, and Aurora B
   regulated sites. All serine residues within the ADP-ribosylated
   proteins were used as a background, and enrichment ratios were
   determined through Fisher Exact Testing with Benjamini-Hochberg
   correction, q<0.02 in all cases. D, Fully annotated EThcD MS/MS
   spectrum, demonstrating confident localization of one ADP-ribosylation
   and two phosphorylation events. Blue; c-ions, red; y-ions, orange;
   z-ions, black; unassigned. E, Overview of the number of
   ADP-ribosylation and phosphorylation co-modified peptides and sites
   identified in total, and across the four experimental conditions. F,
   Visualization of the spacing of phosphorylation relative to
   ADP-ribosylation within co-modified peptides. The black line represents
   the fraction of instances where the phosphorylation spacing could
   theoretically be observed as derived from the distance to the termini
   for all ADP-ribosylated peptides identified in this study, and thus
   serves as a background profile. G, Term enrichment analysis using
   various protein annotations, comparing ADP-ribosylation and
   phosphorylation co-modified sites to other ADP-ribosylation sites
   identified in this study. Relative score is derived from multiplication
   of logarithms derived from the enrichment ratio and the q-value. All
   displayed terms were significant with q<0.02, as determined through
   Fisher Exact Testing with Benjamini-Hochberg correction. “GO”; Gene
   Ontology, “GOMF”; GO Molecular Functions, “GOCC”; GO Cellular
   Compartments, “GOBP”; GO Biological Processes.

   To investigate co-targeting of ADP-ribosylation and phosphorylation
   within our expanded data set, we compared our ADP-ribosylation data to
   a previously published phosphorylation screen carried out in the same
   cell line and under similar conditions ([170]22), as well as global
   phosphorylation data ([171]42). ADP-ribosylation targeted to serine
   residues significantly overlapped to serine phosphorylation ([172]Fig.
   4B and ([173]supplemental Table S6), with 26.4% of identified
   ADP-ribosylation sites also known to be targeted by phosphorylation. In
   line with what we previously described ([174]22), we found a
   significant overlap between H[2]O[2]-induced ADP-ribosylation and
   phosphorylation sites with known regulatory kinases ([175]Fig. 4C).
   Importantly, we found there was a significant correlation between the
   modification abundance of ADP-ribosylation sites and their propensity
   to overlap with phosphorylation, with the top-end ADP-ribosylation
   sites frequently overlapping with phosphorylation. This same trend was
   especially striking for ADP-ribosylation of serine residues usually
   modulated in their phosphorylation state through Aurora Kinase B, with
   a striking ∼100-fold increased likelihood for the top 1%
   ADP-ribosylation sites to target these serine residues.

   We next investigated co-modification of proteins by both
   ADP-ribosylation and phosphorylation at the same time. It is important
   to note that this requires peptides where both PTMs are simultaneously
   present and MS/MS spectra where both PTMs are confidently localized.
   The high resolution of our MS/MS spectra facilitated this analysis, as
   exemplified by identification and localization of one serine
   ADP-ribosylation and two phosphorylation events on a single Histone
   H1.4 peptide ([176]Fig. 4D). In total, 236 co-modified peptides were
   identified, corresponding to 152 unique combinations of
   ADP-ribosylation and phospho sites ([177]Fig. 4E and [178]supplemental
   Table S7). Overall, like what we observed for ADP-ribosylated peptides
   in general, we found that EThcD was more successful at localizing both
   PTMs compared with pure ETD ([179]supplemental Fig. S4A), although all
   experimental conditions identified and localized dozens of co-modified
   peptides. In terms of proteolytic enzymes, we found that co-modified
   peptides generated by Lys-C digestion were more frequently identified
   and less likely to lead to identification of redundant peptides
   ([180]Fig. 4E), which follows the larger peptide sequences generated on
   LysC digestion. Compared with the ADP-ribosylated residue,
   phosphorylation was frequently observed to occur at a spacing of −4,
   +4, +6, or +10 residues ([181]Fig. 4F), although there was no strong
   enrichment in any specific position. Rather, the even-numbered spacing
   could hint at these residues being solvent-exposed considering that
   ADP-ribosylation and phosphorylation both target disordered regions
   ([182]22, [183]54). We observed numerous peptides derived from histones
   to be co-modified ([184]supplemental Table S7), suggesting that
   histones could be a preferred target of co-regulation by
   ADP-ribosylation and phosphorylation crosstalk. Term enrichment
   analysis of proteins found to be preferentially co-modified by
   ADP-ribosylation and phosphorylation highlight transcriptional
   elongation, chromatin remodeling, DNA replication, the DNA damage
   response, tyrosine kinase activity, and ADP-ribosylation itself
   ([185]Fig. 4G and ([186]supplemental Table S6).

ADP-ribosylation on Nonserine Residues

   Although the majority of our data entailed ADP-ribosylation of serine
   residues, our diversified experimental approach allowed us to
   additionally localize and profile an unprecedented number of
   ADP-ribosylation events on other amino acid residues. Next to serine,
   the three most abundantly modified amino acid residues were histidine,
   arginine, and tyrosine, in both number of modified residues and the
   overall fraction of the ADP-ribosylome residing on those residues. In
   total, 705 sites were identified and localized to these three residue
   types, encompassing a combined 2.57% of the ADP-ribosylome ([187]Fig.
   5A and [188]supplemental Table S2).

Fig. 5.

   [189]Fig. 5.
   [190]Open in a new tab

   ADP-ribosylation on nonserine residues. A, Overview of the number of
   ADP-ribosylation sites modifying histidine, arginine, and tyrosine
   residues (dark blue bars), and the fraction of total ADP-ribosylation
   intensity residing on histidine, arginine, and tyrosine residues (light
   blue bars). B, Scaled Venn diagram visualizing overlap between tyrosine
   ADP-ribosylation sites identified in this study and in two other
   proteomics studies reporting tyrosine ADP-ribosylation ([191]22,
   [192]39). Only tyrosine ADP-ribosylation sites confidently localized
   using ETD-type fragmentation were considered. C, Comparison of the
   numerical and intensity fractions of ADP-ribosylation and
   phosphorylation identified on tyrosine residues. D, Term enrichment
   analysis using various protein annotations, comparing tyrosine
   ADP-ribosylation sites to all other ADP-ribosylation sites identified
   in this study. Relative score is derived from multiplication of
   logarithms derived from the enrichment ratio and the q-value. All
   displayed terms were significant with q<0.02, as determined through
   Fisher Exact Testing with Benjamini-Hochberg correction. “GO”; Gene
   Ontology, “GOMF”; GO Molecular Functions, “GOCC”; GO Cellular
   Compartments, “GOBP”; GO Biological Processes. E, IceLogo
   representation of the sequence context surrounding tyrosine
   ADP-ribosylation sites. Amino acid residues displayed above the line
   were enriched, and those displayed below were depleted, compared with
   the sequence context of all tyrosine residues derived from the same
   proteins. All displayed amino acids indicate significant changes as
   determined by two-tailed Student's t-testing, n = 142 tyrosine, n = 299
   arginine, and n = 264 histidine ADP-ribosylation sites, p < 0.05. F, As
   D, but for arginine ADP-ribosylation. G, As E, but for arginine
   ADP-ribosylation. H, As D, but for histidine ADP-ribosylation. I, As E,
   but for histidine ADP-ribosylation.

   Because tyrosine ADP-ribosylation has been previously reported
   ([193]39, [194]55), we first performed a comparison of our tyrosine
   ADP-ribosylation sites to other known sites that were detected through
   unbiased proteomics approaches relying on ETD-based fragmentation
   ([195]Fig. 5B). We identified 71% of previously mapped tyrosine
   ADP-ribosylation sites, and further expanded the number of tyrosine
   ADP-ribosylation sites by >300%, showing that our experimental approach
   especially facilitates identification of ADP-ribosylation sites with
   low-abundance. Intriguingly, we observed a tendency for both the number
   of tyrosine ADP-ribosylation sites and the overall intensity of the
   ADP-ribosylome to be very comparable to that of tyrosine
   phosphorylation when profiled at similar depth, in the same cell line,
   and in response to the same cellular treatment ([196]Fig. 5C).

   With tyrosine also a well-known target of phosphorylation, we performed
   a co-targeting crosstalk analysis like serine ADP-ribosylation (vide
   supra). A high degree of overlap was observed compared with previously
   reported tyrosine phosphorylation sites ([197]supplemental Fig. S4B and
   [198]supplemental Table S6), with 42% of tyrosine ADP-ribosylation
   sites known to also be targeted by phosphorylation. A significant
   overlap was observed with tyrosine ADP-ribosylation sites reported
   recently ([199]22, [200]39), and the overlap between tyrosine
   ADP-ribosylation mapped in this study and tyrosine phosphorylation was
   also found to be significant ([201]supplemental Fig. S4C). The overlap
   between tyrosine ADP-ribosylation and phosphorylation was of a similar
   magnitude as in the case of serine modification, thus hinting at a
   similar regulatory crosstalk at the tyrosine level.

   We next investigated whether we could derive new insight from the
   residue-specific ADP-ribosylation in regard to biological function. To
   this end, we used data generated in this study, and to increase
   statistical accuracy we included tyrosine, arginine, and histidine
   ADP-ribosylation data from our previous study ([202]22). For tyrosine
   ADP-ribosylation, we mainly noted a high propensity for these events to
   modify ribosomal proteins ([203]Fig. 5D and [204]supplemental Table
   S6), with no strong enrichment for any other processes compared with
   general ADP-ribosylation. In terms of sequence context, no strong
   enrichment was observed ([205]Fig. 5E), with the most significant motif
   suggesting a lysine residue at the +1 position of the modified
   tyrosine; i.e. a YK motif. For arginine ADP-ribosylation, enriched
   processes were mainly related to the endoplasmic and sarcoplasmic
   reticulum, along with modification of RNA binding domains ([206]Fig. 5F
   and [207]supplemental Table S6). The protein sequence context
   surrounding ADP-ribosylated arginines primarily suggested a strong
   enrichment for serine residues at all flanking positions ([208]Fig.
   5G). For histidine ADP-ribosylation, the enriched terms suggested
   enrichment in the mitochondrion, myelin sheath, and flavoproteins
   ([209]Fig. 5H and [210]supplemental Table S6), whereas the sequence
   context did not reveal any striking enrichments ([211]Fig. 5I).

   Collectively, our residue-specific analysis suggested that
   ADP-ribosylation may be targeted differentially depending on
   subcellular localization, or in relation to specific protein complexes.
   To further validate and visualize our observations, we subjected all
   proteins to functional clustering analysis through the STRING database,
   and then clustered interconnected proteins by the major function we
   derived for ADP-ribosylation of the specific amino acid types
   ([212]supplemental Fig. S5). Overall, 88.6% of the 481 proteins
   clustered together, and although all of these were modified on at least
   one histidine, arginine, or tyrosine, the majority of ADP-ribosylation
   still occurred on serine residues for proteins not specifically
   associated with nonserine ADP-ribosylation clusters through our
   previous analysis ([213]Fig. 5D–[214]5E). However, a modest enrichment
   could be observed for tyrosine residues in the ribosome cluster, and
   strong enrichments for modification of histidine residues in the
   mitochondrion cluster, and arginine residues in the endoplasmic
   reticulum cluster, hinting at specific biological roles and regulations
   for tyrosine, arginine, and histidine ADP-ribosylation events.

DISCUSSION

   In this study, we optimized our MS-based proteomics methodology for the
   identification and localization of ADP-ribosylation sites. To this end,
   we expanded on the established Af1521 workflow by incorporating
   separate trypsin and Lys-C digestions, optimizing several stages of the
   purification, and using both ETD and EThcD fragmentation of precursors.
   Overall, this allowed us to identify >7000 unique ADP-ribosylation
   sites modifying >2000 proteins, corresponding to over one-third of the
   nuclear proteome.

   Using exclusively Lys-C to digest proteins generates larger, more
   hydrophobic, and higher charged peptides, because contrary to tryptic
   digestion there is no cleavage C-terminal of arginine residues. We
   expected the higher charge state to aid in identification of the
   peptides, as we previously observed that ADP-ribosylated precursors
   with a charge state of 2 are very difficult to resolve with ETD-type
   fragmentation ([215]22). Indeed, we found that Lys-C digestion resulted
   on average in somewhat larger ADP-ribosylated peptides, higher charged
   precursors, and higher spectral assignment scores and lower posterior
   error probabilities. However, owing to the increased size of the
   peptides, high-confidence localization of ADP-ribosylation proved more
   challenging ([216]Figs. 2B and [217]supplemental Fig. S4C), ultimately
   leading to a virtually identical identification rate of the trypsin- or
   Lys-C-derived peptides.

   Nonetheless, we found that the tryptic and Lys-C digests resulted in
   the generation of highly complementary peptides, with many of them
   harboring ADP-ribosylation events that were exclusive to either one or
   the other, and over two-thirds of all ADP-ribosylation sites uniquely
   identified through one enzymatic digest. Usage of multiple digestion
   enzymes has previously been reported to increase protein sequence
   coverage ([218]29, [219]41, [220]56), with certain digestion strategies
   precluding regions that would be represented by peptides that are
   either too short or too long for mass spectrometric analysis, e.g.
   arginine-rich protein regions when using tryptic digestion. Contrary to
   total protein analysis, PTM analysis is restricted to finding specific
   and often low-abundant peptides, and we reason that because of this the
   added effect of using different digestion strategies is magnified.
   However, usage of multiple proteases comes with an increased demand of
   mass spectrometric analysis time. Thus, usage of either trypsin or
   Lys-C digestion for analysis of ADP-ribosylated peptides could be
   considered as another dimension of sample fractionation.

   Previously, we relied on pure ETD to identify and localize all
   ADP-ribosylation events, after establishing that HCD fragmentation
   usually prohibits reliable localization of ADP-ribose when using
   unrestricted database searches ([221]22). Because EThcD is a
   combination of ETD and HCD, we initially worried that the inclusion of
   the HCD dimension could partially nullify the nonergodic propensity of
   ETD fragmentation. Others have demonstrated application of EThcD for
   detection of ADP-ribosylated peptides ([222]36) but used relatively
   high levels of supplemental activation (SA) energy. In our initial
   optimization, we used relatively low amounts of SA energy to establish
   a good balance between ETD- and HCD-driven fragmentation. Indeed, we
   observed that at the lowest SA energy, the fragmentation behavior of
   ADP-ribosylated peptides essentially mimicked pure ETD fragmentation.
   Even toward the highest SA energy we used, we saw increasingly high
   localization probability of the ADP-ribose, and importantly the
   ADP-ribose remained attached to the peptides even at the higher SA
   energies. This suggests that the peptide fragmentation remains
   primarily driven by ETD, with the HCD dimension assisting in breaking
   peptide bonds that are resistant to ETD. Nonetheless, we observed a
   drop in identification efficiency at the highest level of SA energy we
   tested, which could be related to an on average decreasing spectral
   quality as SA energy was increased, likely a result of increasing
   spectral complexity with larger fractions of the peaks remaining
   unassigned.

   Overall, we found that using EThcD fragmentation with a low amount of
   SA energy increased both identification and localization of
   ADP-ribosylation, compared with pure ETD fragmentation. However,
   compared with using either Lys-C or trypsin to digest the samples, we
   did not observe a lot of complementarity between analyzing samples with
   either ETD or EThcD, with EThcD generally outperforming ETD. Thus,
   whereas analyzing half of the samples with trypsin or Lys-C digestions
   could yield a higher number of identifications rather than analyzing
   full samples with either one of the enzymes alone, we surmise that it
   would in most cases be optimal to analyze all samples exclusively with
   EThcD.

   Although we initially expected that EThcD would aid in dissociation of
   charge-reduced ADP-ribosylated peptide precursors, we did not observe
   this to a notable degree. Indeed, it has previously been reported that
   EThcD is not necessarily optimal for this purpose ([223]57). A
   potential optimization of our method could involve application of
   activated ion ETD (AI-ETD), which is based on infrared photoactivation
   ([224]57) and is very efficient at dissociation of both precursors and
   charge-reduced precursors. AI-ETD has been used for total proteome
   analysis as well as for phosphoproteomics, and has proven superior to
   not only ETD alone, but also to EThcD ([225]57–[226]58), indicating
   that this could be a valuable technology for studying ADP-ribosylation.

   With the increased depth of sequencing entailed within our dataset,
   along with the overall higher level of spectral quality, we were able
   to more confidently derive biological phenomena. We could readily
   confirm all known system-wide properties of ADP-ribosylation, including
   a predominantly nuclear localization, modification of a plethora of
   proteins involved in DNA repair and chromatin remodeling, preferential
   modification of serine residues, targeting of serine residues residing
   in KS motifs, and a significant overlap with phosphoserines. Moreover,
   we were able to statistically verify new phenomena, including
   co-targeting of tyrosine residues by ADP-ribosylation and
   phosphorylation, simultaneous co-modification of proteins by
   ADP-ribosylation and phosphorylation, and functional associations with
   ADP-ribosylation of histidine, arginine, and tyrosine residues.

   Crosstalk between phosphorylation and ADP-ribosylation has been
   previously described ([227]55, [228]59), and we could observe a notable
   degree of this within our data. Importantly, we found that there is an
   abundance-driven co-targeting for serine residues, with the most
   abundant ADP-ribosylation events having the highest degree of overlap
   with phosphoserines, and specifically those for which regulatory
   kinases are known. Biologically, this suggests a regulatory role for
   ADP-ribosylation with the targeting of these residues, as the prompt
   modification of these serine residues would prohibit phosphorylation
   from modifying them. Further, we observed a similar effect for tyrosine
   ADP-ribosylation, which significantly overlapped with previously
   reported tyrosine phosphorylation events. The observed degree of
   tyrosine co-targeting was comparable to serine co-targeting, which
   could similarly suggest a regulatory role for ADP-ribosylation in
   precluding tyrosine phosphorylation.

   Identification of peptide co-modification is innately technically
   challenging, because peptides must be resolved that harbor both PTMs,
   both PTMs have to be localized, and the analysis is by nature subject
   to the potentially limited abundance of both PTMs. Nonetheless, we were
   able to identify 236 ADP-ribose and phosphorylation co-modified
   peptides, corresponding to 152 unique sites, and accounting for ∼1% of
   the total ADP-ribosylome. Systems-wide mapping of these co-modified
   peptides suggests that, other than co-targeting of the same residues,
   ADP-ribosylation and phosphorylation may frequently be targeted to the
   same regions of proteins. Although we did not observe a predominant
   spacing or motif between the two PTMs, their spatiotemporal
   co-existence and preferential targeting to disordered regions of
   proteins could suggest another layer of regulatory crosstalk between
   ADP-ribosylation and phosphorylation.

   When considering ADP-ribosylation targeted to amino acid residues other
   than serine, we observed frequent modification of histidine, arginine,
   and tyrosine residues. Modification of all three of these amino acid
   residues by ADP-ribosylation has been previously reported ([229]11,
   [230]15, [231]39), although only modification of arginine residues has
   been more widely studied. We carried out our experiments in HeLa cells
   exposed to hydrogen peroxide, which does not necessarily equate a model
   system specifically tuned for detection of specific types of amino acid
   residues being ADP-ribosylated. Nonetheless, the unprecedented depth of
   our dataset allowed us to observe uniquely enriched biological pathways
   for each type of amino acid residue. For tyrosine residues, we observed
   a propensity for modification of ribosomal proteins. It should be
   mentioned that overall tyrosine ADP-ribosylation occurred on
   high-abundant proteins, and the modified proteins were frequently also
   modified on other types of amino acid residues. For arginine residues,
   preferential modification of proteins associated with the endoplasmic
   reticulum was observed, which is consistent with the reported
   localization of human ARTC1 to the endoplasmic reticulum ([232]60).
   Sequence context analysis highlighted a relatively high degree of
   serine residues flanking the modified arginine, potentially because of
   a propensity for arginine ADP-ribosylation to target RNA-binding
   proteins rich in serine and arginine residues. For histidine residues,
   modification was found on proteins associated with the mitochondrion.
   Histidine phosphorylation has previously been observed to modify
   mitochondrial proteins, and has been linked to regulation of
   mitochondrial function ([233]61). Analogous to histidine
   phosphorylation, ADP-ribosylation of histidines could potentially be
   involved in mitochondrial regulation.

   Collectively, we expand knowledge regarding the human ADP-ribosylome
   using an augmented and unbiased enrichment strategy based on the Af1521
   macrodomain. We find that EThcD outperforms pure ETD fragmentation for
   identification and localization of ADP-ribosylation, whereas digestion
   using multiple proteases identifies complementary sites. Taken
   together, we observe modification of over one-third of the nuclear
   proteome by ADP-ribosylation in response to DNA damage, and our
   comprehensive dataset of ADP-ribosylation sites will aid in
   understanding the system-wide scope of this pivotal post-translational
   modification.

DATA AVAILABILITY

   Annotated MS/MS spectra are available online through MS-Viewer
   ([234]49), by using accession code six0vh83co
   ([235]http://msviewer.ucsf.edu/prospector/cgi-bin/msform.cgi?form=msvie
   wer). Specific spectra of interest can be found by filtering Column 8
   in the MS-Viewer table for the corresponding modified peptide sequence
   from Column D in [236]Table S1.

   The mass spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited to the
   ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE ([237]50) partner repository
   with the dataset identifier PXD012243
   ([238]https://www.ebi.ac.uk/pride/archive/projects/PXD012243).

Supplementary Material

   Supplementary Data
   [239]142909_1_supp_289222_pnv0hc.pdf^ (841KB, pdf)
   Supplementary Table 1
   [240]142909_1_supp_289210_pnm0hc.xlsx^ (2.2MB, xlsx)
   Supplementary Table 2
   [241]142909_1_supp_289211_pn7zfz.xlsx^ (2MB, xlsx)
   Supplementary Table 3
   [242]142909_1_supp_289212_pn7zfy.xlsx^ (459.4KB, xlsx)
   Supplementary Table 4
   [243]142909_1_supp_289213_pn7zf9.xlsx^ (870.4KB, xlsx)
   Supplementary Table 5
   [244]142909_1_supp_289214_pn7zfg.xlsx^ (7.4MB, xlsx)
   Supplementary Table 6
   [245]142909_1_supp_289215_pn7zfh.xlsx^ (207.1KB, xlsx)
   Supplementary Table 7
   [246]142909_1_supp_289209_pn7zfd.xlsx^ (68.5KB, xlsx)

Acknowledgments
