Abstract

   Previous research has shown that although NF2 gene mutation is the
   major cause of vestibular schwannoma (VS), it may not directly
   participate in cystic VS (CVS). To elucidate the underlying potential
   genetic mechanisms in the cystic formation of VS, we compared
   differences in gene expression between solid VS (SVS) and CVS via a
   bioinformatics analysis. The cDNA microarray method and miRNA
   sequencing were performed on 29 representative VSs (17 CVSs and 12
   SVSs). A differential expression analysis was used to identify
   differentially expressed mRNAs (DEmRNAs) and miRNAs (DEmiRNAs). Then,
   miRNA–mRNA regulatory networks were constructed. Gene ontology (GO), a
   KEGG pathway enrichment analysis, and the protein–protein interaction
   (PPI) were used to analyze the co-differentially expressed DEmRNAs at
   the functional level. From the differential expression analyses, 1304
   DEmRNAs, 55 DEmiRNAs, and hub genes including PTEN, FOXO1, FOXO3,
   VEGFA, and SIRT1 were identified. Histological evidence is presented to
   confirm the makeup of the hubs, which corresponded with the cDNA
   microarray. Our analysis revealed that the maps of apoptosis, cellular
   response to hypoxia, and the PI3K-Akt, AMPK, FOXO, and chemokine
   signaling pathways were significantly enriched. In addition, the TUNEL
   assay, immunoblotting analysis, and transmission electron microscope
   revealed increased degenerative changes in CVS. These findings could be
   the foundation for understanding the potential role of differential
   genes in the cystic formation of VS and be helpful in exploring the
   potential biomarkers for the differential diagnosis, prognosis, and
   development of drug targets for CVS.

Electronic supplementary material

   The online version of this article (10.1007/s10142-019-00672-5)
   contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized
   users.

   Keywords: Vestibular schwannoma, Cystic formation, Bioinformatics
   analysis, Potential biomarker

Introduction

   Vestibular schwannoma (VS) arises from the vestibular branch of the
   eighth cranial nerve, accounting for 6–8% of all intracranial
   tumors(Wandong et al. [38]2005; Piccirillo et al. [39]2009). Although
   histologically benign, VS often leads to tinnitus, asymmetric hearing
   loss, disequilibrium, facial numbness, and facial weakness. If left
   untreated, these tumors can present with catastrophic complications,
   such as hydrocephalus, brain stem compression, herniation, and even
   death.

   VS can be classified into two subtypes depending on neuroradiological
   appearance: solid VS (SVS) and cystic VS (CVS) (Piccirillo et al.
   [40]2009). CVS is estimated to constitute 6.8 to 20.4% of VS(Jones et
   al. [41]2007; Sinha and Sharma [42]2008; Piccirillo et al. [43]2009;
   Jian et al. [44]2011) and is characterized by aggressive clinical
   features, such as a rapid rate of tumor expansion(Selesnick and Johnson
   [45]1998), frequent adherence to the facial nerve(de Ipolyi et al.
   [46]2008), and unpredictable biological behavior(Moon et al. [47]2007;
   Mehrotra et al. [48]2008). It often presents a predicament for
   neurotologists in choosing management options for cystic vestibular
   schwannomas: observation will delay the optimal treatment time due to
   sudden or persistent fast growth, radiotherapy may increase the risk of
   rapid cyst expansion (de Ipolyi et al. [49]2008), and microsurgical
   resection could achieve poorer postoperative functional outcomes
   compared with solid lesions(Sinha and Sharma [50]2008).

   Elucidating the underlying potential genetic mechanisms in the cystic
   formation of VS may be helpful in the treatment of CVS. Mutations in
   the NF2 gene are essential for VS pathogenesis (Jacoby et al. [51]1994;
   Cayé-Thomasen et al. [52]2010); however, our previous study concluded
   that dysregulation in the NF2 gene is not directly involved in the
   cystic formation of VS (Zhang et al. [53]2014).

   In the present study, we aimed to closely analyze the differences in
   gene profiles between SVS and CVS to identify differentially expressed
   mRNAs (DEmRNAs), miRNAs (DEmiRNA), and hub genes. DEmRNAs and DEmiRNAs
   can be used for screening susceptible pathways in cystic formation, and
   hub genes are supposed to facilitate clinical work after carefully
   considering clinical relevance.

Materials and methods

Patients and tumor tissue samples

   Fresh tumor specimens were collected from patients diagnosed with
   sporadic VS who underwent microsurgery in a general hospital between
   June 2008 and June 2016. Tumors could be defined as cystic depending on
   the following appearances (Fig. [54]S1): the presence of hypointense
   areas on T1-weighted postgadolinium magnetic resonance imaging and
   intraoperative identification of cystic elements (Benech et al.
   [55]2005).

   All patients signed informed consent forms releasing a neoplasm sample
   for research purposes. This study was approved by the Ethics Committee
   of the Shanghai Jiaotong University School of Medicine, Ninth People’s
   Hospital, Shanghai, China.

cDNA microarray analysis and miRNA sequencing

   Tumor tissue samples including 11 CVSs and 6 SVSs from the subcapsular
   part were immediately immersed in the RNA store reagent (Beyotime,
   Shanghai, China) after resection. Total RNA was extracted using the
   TRIzol reagent (Invitrogen, CA) and reverse transcribed into
   complementary DNA (cDNA) using the Quantscript RT kit (Tiangen
   Biotech). Hybridization was performed overnight on the Illumina
   Human-12T v4 Expression BeadChip (Illumina, San Diego, CA), which
   contains 47,231 probes per array product. The data of the gene
   expression profiles were analyzed using the Illumina BeadStudio module
   application (Illumina).

   miRNA sequencing was performed in 12 tissue samples (6 CVSs and 6
   SVSs). The tumor tissues were dipped in the RNAstore Reagent (Beyotime,
   Shanghai, China) immediately and delivered to Jing Neng Bio-Technology
   Corporation (Shanghai, China) with dry ice for high-throughput
   sequencing. The 12-sample sequencing data were combined to construct a
   miRNA library of VS tissue. By evaluating the number of transcripts per
   million (TPM), the sequences in each sample were compared with the
   miRNA library established during the study.

Differential expression analysis

   To identify differentially expressed mRNAs or miRNAs between CVSs and
   SVSs, differential expression analyses were completed by the Illumina
   package R data structures, which could be used by many algorithms in
   other R packages. The distributions of value data could be viewed
   graphically or exported as a statistical summary table, which is useful
   for determining if these data are median-centered across samples and
   thus suitable for cross-comparison. The extreme outliers in the data
   set were removed by t-distributed stochastic neighbor embedding (t-SNE)
   (Fig. [56]S2).

   A difference of two or greater in the intensity of gene expression
   between CVSs and SVSs was sought. Genes or miRNAs that were
   overexpressed or underexpressed were cataloged. A Student’s t test was
   then used to identify DEmRNAs or significantly differentially expressed
   miRNAs (DEmiRNA), with a p value cutoff of < 0.05 and a fold change
   cutoff at 2. To review the characteristics of the mRNA and miRNA
   expression profiles, heat maps were further generated by a hierarchical
   clustering analysis based on the normalized values of DEmRNAs and
   DEmiRNAs using the pheatmap package in R.

Correlation and co-expression analysis

   The construction of miRNA–mRNA interaction pairs was a better way to
   understand the functional forecast of miRNAs. To integrate the miRNA
   and mRNA expression profiles, we combined DEmiRNAs with experimentally
   verified interactions of mRNA targets from miRTarBase
   ([57]http://mirtarbase.mbc.nctu.edu.tw/php/index.php). These
   interactions were supported by strong experimental evidence (reporter
   assay or western blot). miRNA–mRNA networks were constructed and
   visualized by Cytoscape ([58]http://cytoscape.org/).

Delineation of functional annotation

   Considering that miRNAs execute functions by regulating the expression
   of target genes, the biological function of the co-differentially
   expressed DEmRNAs needs to be identified. As a canonical method to
   annotate genes and gene products, the gene ontology (GO) analysis,
   including biological process (BP), cellular component (CC), and
   molecular function (MF), helps identify biological traits for
   high-throughput genome or transcriptome data. KEGG
   ([59]http://www.genome.jp/) is a common omnibus for systematically
   interpreting gene functions, facilitating an intensive understanding of
   genomic information and higher-order functional information (Kanehisa
   and Goto [60]2000). Feeding a certain gene list to the DAVID database
   ([61]https://david.ncifcrf.gov/) is an essential procedure for further
   functional analysis and relevant biological annotation of
   high-throughput genome or transcriptome data (Dennis et al. [62]2003).
   To annotate DEmRNAs at the functional level, GO enrichment and KEGG
   pathway analyses were performed with the DAVID online tool.
   Statistically significant p values were set at 0.05 or less.

Apoptosis evaluation by TUNEL assay

   The terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase–mediated dUTP-nick end
   labeling (TUNEL) assay was performed to identify apoptosis in VS cells.
   The tumor tissue sections were deparaffinized in xylene and hydrated in
   alcohol, and then the sections were stained with the In Situ Cell Death
   Detection Kit (Roche, Mannheim, Germany). The sections were incubated
   with the tunnel reaction mixture and kept at 37 °C for 2 h in the dark.
   Then, 4′, 6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI, CST, US) DAPI was added to
   label the nuclei. Finally, they were observed with a Nikon H500S
   electron microscope. The percentage of TUNEL-positive nuclei was
   assessed from at least 100 randomly selected cells from each of the
   three different SVS or CVS samples (five slides of each sample for
   quantitative analysis).

Immunoblotting analysis

   Immunoblotting analysis was performed with antibodies specific for
   caspase-3 (1;1000, #9662, Cell Signaling), cleaved caspase-3 (1;1000,
   #9664, Cell Signaling), caspase-9 (1;1000, ab202068, Abcam), and
   cleaved caspase-9 (1;1000, #52873, Cell Signaling). The β-actin
   antibody (1;1000, #AA128, Beyotime) was used to ensure equal loading of
   total protein.

Transmission electron microscopy

   The VS tissues were cut into samples with a size of 1 mm^3 and rapidly
   fixed in 2.5% glutaraldehyde. Tumor samples were washed three times
   with 0.1 M phosphate buffer and then fixed with 1% osmium tetroxide
   (Pelco, US) at 4 °C. After dehydration with ethanol, the samples were
   embedded in Spurr resin (SPI-Chem, US) and taken for polymerization and
   repair. Finally, the embedded blocks were sliced into ultrathin slices,
   stained with both uranyl acetate (SPI-Chem, US) and lead citrate
   (SPI-Chem,US), and observed under a transmission electron microscope
   (JEM1230, JEOL, Japan). All images of ultrathin slices and electron
   microscope sections shown are representative of at least three
   individual tissues in each group.

Protein–protein interaction and module analysis

   The Search Tool for the Retrieval of Interacting Genes (STRING)
   database is an online tool for evaluating protein–protein interaction
   (PPI) information. The latest version of STRING (version 10.0) covers
   184 million interactions of 9.6 million proteins from 2031 organisms.
   DEmRNAs were processed in STRING to uncover the most significant
   interactive relationships, in which a criterion of a combined score
   > 0.4 was set as the significance level. The information on the PPI
   networks from STRING was analyzed in Cytoscape software, in which a
   tool called Molecular Complex Detection (MCODE) directly illustrated
   the most significant clusters of the PPI network. The false degree
   cutoff, node score cutoff, haircut, false K core, and max depth from
   seed were set at 2, 0.2, true, 2, and 100, respectively.

Immunohistochemical evaluation

   The tumor tissue sections were dewaxed and rehydrated. An antigen
   retrieval procedure was performed following immersion in EDTA buffer
   (pH9.0) and rinsing with PBS (pH7.4). The endogenous peroxidase was
   then blocked with 3% hydrogen peroxide solution for 25 min at room
   temperature in the dark, and nonspecific binding was blocked with 3%
   bull serum albumin (BSA) for 30 min. Then, the sections were serially
   incubated with anti-PTEN antibody (1:300, GB11169, Servicebio, Wuhan,
   China), anti-SIRT1 antibody (1:100, GB1171, Servicebio, Wuhan, China),
   anti-FOXO1 (1:500, GB11286-1, Servicebio, Wuhan, China), anti-FOXO3
   (1:200; NBP2-16521, NOVUS, Colorado, USA), and anti-VEGFA (1:300,
   GB1034, Servicebio, Wuhan, China) at 4 °C for 24 h and then washed in
   PBS. Next, the sections were incubated for 50 min in goat
   anti-rabbit/mouse IgG-HRP polymer and then incubated with DAB
   Chromogen. The percentage of positively stained cells was assessed from
   at least 100 randomly selected cells from each of the three different
   SVS or CVS samples (five slides of each sample for quantitative
   analysis). Finally, the sections were photographed under a light
   microscope.

Results

Data processing of DEmRNAs and DEmiRNAs

   To identify the possible gene expressional change in VS, 29
   representative tumors (17 CVSs and 12 SVSs) were subjected to a
   differentially expressed mRNA and miRNA analysis using the cDNA
   microarray method and high-throughput sequencing, respectively. The
   t-distributed stochastic neighbor embedding (t-SNE) of the cDNA
   microarray and miRNA sequencing data demonstrated the global separation
   of the CVS and SVS samples (Supplementary Fig. [63]2A and Fig. [64]2b).

Fig. 2.

   Fig. 2
   [65]Open in a new tab

   Networks of DEmiRNAs and DEmRNAs. Circle nodes represent mRNAs and
   triangle nodes represent miRNAs, and their interactions were
   represented by gray edges

   With the expression level normalized, 1304 mRNAs and 55 miRNAs were
   found to be differentially expressed between SVSs and CVSs. Among these
   DEmRNAs, 647 were downregulated and 657 were upregulated. Out of 55
   DEmiRNAs, 33 miRNAs were downregulated and 22 miRNAs were upregulated.
   The top 10 upregulated and downregulated DEmRNAs and DEmiRNAs are shown
   in Fig. [66]1a and Fig. [67]1b. Additionally, Fig. [68]1c and Fig.
   [69]1d present the expression level distributions of these DEmRNAs and
   DEmiRNAs in CVSs and SVSs.

Fig. 1.

   Fig. 1
   [70]Open in a new tab

   Differentially expressed mRNAs (DEmRNAs), miRNAs (DEmiRNAs), and
   DEmRNAs’ chromosome locus analysis. a, b Hierarchical clustering
   analysis of DEmRNAs and DEmiRNAs for a comparison of CVS and SVS
   samples. Yellow, higher expression of DEmRNAs or DEmiRNAs; purple,
   lower expression of DEmRNAs or DEmiRNAs. c, d The expression of top 10
   upregulated and downregulated DEmRNAs and DEmiRNAs. e, f Peak
   visualization and Manhattan plots presenting expression levels and p
   values relative to chromosome locus

   Plots of the chromosomal locations of the DEmRNAs are shown in Fig.
   [71]1e and Fig. [72]1f. As shown in Fig. [73]1e, the DEmRNAs were
   approximately located in the plus strand and minus strand. A total of
   34,690 genes were scattered by their p values and chromosomes in Fig.
   [74]1f. Genetic mapping information from a total of 34,690 genes was
   scattered by their p values and chromosomes. The most significant mRNAs
   of all chromosomes were associated with the negative log of the
   corresponding p value between 0.01 and 0.001, as highlighted in Fig.
   [75]1e.

Co-expression of miRNAs and mRNAs in CVS

   Considering that miRNAs execute functions by regulating the expression
   of target genes, we combined all 55 DEmiRNAs with experimentally
   verified interactions of mRNA targets from miRTarBase. Out of these
   targets, 540 were predicted mRNAs; however, only 43 were on the DEmRNAs
   list (Fig. [76]2a). We assumed that these 55 DEmiRNAs and 43 DEmRNAs
   may contribute to the cystic formation. Figure [77]2b shows the 67
   interaction pairs between these DEmiRNAs and DEmRNAs.

Biofunction enrichment analysis and verification

   Gene ontology (GO) needs the co-differentially expressed DEmRNAs to be
   identified. With the DEmRNAs uploaded to the online tool DAVID, the
   DEmRNAs were significantly enriched in biological processes (BP),
   including angiogenesis, positive regulation of cell migration, cellular
   response to hypoxia, apoptosis, and neuroblast proliferation
   (Fig. [78]3a). For molecular function (MF), the DEmRNAs were involved
   in protein binding, transcription factor binding, platelet-derived
   growth factor receptor binding, sequence-specific DNA binding,
   chromatin binding, and fibronectin binding (Fig. [79]3a). In addition,
   the GO cell component (CC) analysis also showed that the DEmRNAs were
   significantly enriched in nuclear chromatin, cell surface,
   extracellular space, apical plasma membrane, and basolateral plasma
   membrane (Fig. [80]3a).

Fig. 3.

   [81]Fig. 3
   [82]Open in a new tab

   Biofunction enrichment analysis and verification. a Functional analysis
   of genes differentially regulated between CVS and SVS. –log10 of the
   enrichment p values for selected GO categories (BP biological process,
   CC cellular components, MF molecular function) are plotted relative to
   fold enrichments in each category. Circle size denotes the number of
   regulated genes. b Apoptosis was determined using TUNEL assay between
   CVS and SVS. Green fluorescence indicates TUNEL-positive cells in the
   microscopic fields. DAPI was used for nuclear staining (magnification
   × 400). c Quantification of apoptotic cardiomyocytes in two groups.
   Data are presented as the mean ± SEM, n = 3 in each group, *p < 0.05. d
   The protein expressions of caspase-3, caspase-9, cleaved caspase-3, and
   cleaved caspase-9 were determined by immunoblotting analysis. e
   Ultrastructural observations of CVS and SVS samples using transmission
   electron microscopy. R, endoplasmic reticulum (white arrow); M,
   mitochondria. Red rectangle point to apoptotic body. Scale bar, 0 .5μm.
   f The shape and area in CVS and SVS tissues were measured using ImageJ
   program. Data are presented as the mean ± SEM, n = 3 in each group,
   *p < 0.05

   Further investigations were presented to determine the apoptosis,
   cellular response to hypoxia, and extracellular space changes in CVS
   tumor tissues by TUNEL. immunoblotting, and TEM. Compared with the SVS
   tissues, the CVS tissues showed less cellularity and increased
   apoptotic cells (TUNEL positive) (Fig. [83]3b and c), suggesting that
   apoptosis might be enhanced in CVS. Furthermore, apoptosis-related
   molecules expressions were determined by immunoblotting. The results
   showed that cleaved caspase-3 and cleaved caspase-9 expressions were
   increased in CVS tissues (Fig. [84]3d). Moreover, electron microscopy
   revealed ultrastructural signs of atypical cell death with larger and
   rounder mitochondria and the inner mitochondrial matrices were either
   damaged or almost absent, and dilatation of rough endoplasmic reticulum
   as well as the occurrence of apoptotic bodies in CVS (Fig. [85]3e and
   f). All of these results indicate increased degenerative changes in
   CVS.

Susceptible pathways and clusters

   The KEGG pathway map from DAVID indicated that the co-differentially
   expressed DEmRNAs were significantly enriched in the PI3K-Akt signaling
   pathway and the pathways in cancer, the AMPK, FOXO, and chemokine
   signaling pathways (Fig. [86]4a).

Fig. 4.

   [87]Fig. 4
   [88]Open in a new tab

   Kyoto encyclopedia of genes and genomes (KEGG) pathway enrichment
   analysis of the co-differentially-expressed DEmRNAs. Gene sets with top
   10 values are plotted relative to normalized enrichment scores (NES).
   Circle size denotes the number of enriched genes in each category, and
   circle colors represent p values as indicated

   Based on the PPI network derived from the STRING database, Cytoscape
   software was employed for visualizing the network of the
   co-differentially expressed DEmRNAs (Fig. [89]5a). The MCODE plugin in
   Cytoscape further presented the most significant cluster (Fig. [90]5B),
   including PTEN, FOXO1, FOXO3, VEGFA, and SIRT1. These hub genes were
   selected for further investigation.

Fig. 5.

   [91]Fig. 5
   [92]Open in a new tab

   Protein–protein interaction (PPI). a PPI network between CVS and SVS.
   Pink, downregulated genes. Green, upregulated genes. b The most
   significant cluster from PPI network

Clinical relevance of identified genes

   Further analysis of the hub genes in the most significant cluster in
   the SVS and CVS comparison is presented. The areas under the curve
   (AUC) of PTEN, FOXO1, FOXO3, VEGFA, and SIRT1 were 0.8636, 0.8485,
   0.8333, 0.8182 and 0.8485, respectively, with the receiver operating
   characteristic curve (ROC) in Fig. [93]6a indicating that PTEN, FOXO1,
   FOXO3, VEGFA, and SIRT1 are potential biomarkers of CVS. Moreover, the
   immunohistochemistry demonstrated that PTEN, SIRT1, and FOXO3 were
   expressed at higher levels in CVS tissue (Fig. [94]6b), consistent with
   the cDNA microarray. Therefore, a combination of these three markers
   may potentially improve the predictions of disease outcome.

Fig. 6.

   [95]Fig. 6
   [96]Open in a new tab

   Clinical relevance of hub genes. a Receiver operating characteristic
   curve of FOXO1, FOXO3, PTEN, SIRT1, and VEGFA. b Immunohistochemical
   analysis showing levels of FOXO1, FOXO3, PTEN, SIRT1, and VEGFA in CVS
   tissues and SVS tissues. Scale bar, 100 μm. c Quantitative analysis of
   FOXO1, FOXO3, PTEN, SIRT1, and VEGFA expression in CVS and SVS tissues.
   Data are presented as the mean ± SEM, n = 3 in each group, **p < 0.01,
   ***p < 0.001

Discussion

   CVS has a shorter duration of symptoms and unpredictable biological
   behavior. However, the exact pathogenesis of the cystic formation
   within VS remains unclear. Previous researchers have analyzed cystic
   degeneration and enlargement from different perspectives, including
   histomorphology, cell distribution, and protein expression: (I) serum
   proteins exuded from a damaged blood-tumor barrier or protein secreted
   by tumor cells could result in cystic enlargement due to an osmotic
   effect (Schober et al. [97]1992); (II) Park et al. (Park et al.
   [98]2006) identified evidence such as hemosiderin-laden macrophages,
   hemosiderin deposits, and abnormal vessel proliferation in CVS,
   suggesting that previous bleeding within the lesion and repeated
   intratumoral microhemorrhage may lead to cystic formation; and (III)
   some reports (Moon et al. [99]2007) suggest the role of matrix
   metalloproteinases in the formation of cysts and adhesion of the tumor
   to the surrounding structures.

   At present, there are few reports on the mechanism of the cystic
   changes of vestibular schwannoma from the perspective of genetics or
   transcriptomics. Our previous study showed that although the NF2 gene
   mutation is the major cause of VS, it may not directly participate in
   the cystic formation of VS (Zhang et al. [100]2014). In the present
   study, we obtained the lists of DEmRNAs and DEmiRNAs of CVS by cDNA
   microarray and miRNA sequencing, respectively, and acquired 1304 genes
   and 55 miRNAs after normalization. Comprehensive analysis of the
   miRNA-mRNA regulatory networks facilitates the understanding of gene
   regulation, providing further insight into the downstream effects of
   miRNA-mRNA. We combined all 55 DEmiRNAs with experimentally verified
   interactions of mRNA targets from miRTarBase and obtained 583 targeted
   mRNAs. Out of these targets, 540 were predicted mRNAs; however, only 43
   were on the DEmRNAs list. We assumed that these 55 DEmiRNAs and 43
   DEmRNAs may contribute to the cystic formation, and we constructed 67
   DEmiRNA–DEmRNA pairs in more depth. miRNA is generally thought to
   negatively regulate its target gene by repressing mRNA translation or
   degrading mRNA. However, we observed a positive correlation in some
   networks of miRNA-mRNA, which is inconsistent with the intuitive
   understanding of the regulation mechanism of miRNA. The positive
   correlation may be the result of an adaptive response to changes in
   gene expression (Nunez et al. [101]2013).

   GO and KEGG pathway analyses were performed to better understand the
   biological function of the co-differentially expressed DEmRNAs. The GO
   term analysis showed that these DEmRNAs were mainly involved in
   apoptosis, angiogenesis, cellular response to hypoxia, nuclear
   chromatin, cell surface, extracellular space, apical plasma membrane,
   and basolateral plasma membrane. In addition, the KEGG pathway analysis
   revealed that the co-differentially expressed DEmRNAs were
   significantly enriched in the PI3K-Akt signaling pathway and the
   pathways in cancer, the AMPK, FOXO, and chemokine signaling pathways.
   TUNEL and TEM were performed for further investigations on the
   apoptosis, cellular response to hypoxia, and extracellular space
   changes in CVS. It suggested that apoptosis might be enhanced in CVS.
   In addition, TEM revealed ultrastructural signs of cell death with the
   swelling of mitochondria and loss of cristae, dilatation and
   vesiculation of rough endoplasmic reticulum as well as the formation of
   vacuoles in the majority of cells, and the occurrence of apoptotic
   bodies and autophagosomes in CVS. Interestingly, the results obtained
   from the bioinformatics analysis are partially consistent with our
   experimental results, suggesting that apoptosis and oxidative stress
   may play a key role in the cystic changes of vestibular schwannoma. To
   a certain extent, managing these signaling pathways may facilitate the
   manipulation and prediction of cystic degeneration of VS.

   The hub genes PTEN, FOXO1, FOXO3, VEGFA, and SIRT1 were recommended as
   useful biomarkers in the most enriched cluster in the SVS and CVS gene
   profile comparison. PTEN plays a key role in tumorigenesis as a tumor
   suppressor. PTEN has lipid phosphatase activity, which enables it to
   dephosphorylate the D3 position of phosphatidylinositol
   3,4,5-triphosphate (PIP3) and antagonize the AKT signaling pathway.
   This signaling pathway is involved in a variety of physiological
   processes including cell growth, cell cycle progression, and survival.
   Previous study indicated that mutation of PTEN is associated with
   better clinical outcome in renal cell carcinomas with unclassified
   histology (Chen et al. [102]2016). Researchers found that PTEN
   hypermethylation values existed in VS (18% in cancer specimens vs. 0%
   in normal controls), but it cannot be correlated with observed clinical
   features (Lassaletta et al. [103]2006). VEGFA is a prototypic member of
   the VEGF protein family, which also includes VEGFB, VEGFC, VEGFD, and
   placental growth factor (PLGF). Moreover, VEGF has long been known as a
   molecular marker involved in VS development (Cayé-Thomasen et al.
   [104]2003; Koutsimpelas et al. [105]2012). Clinically, inhibitors of
   vascular endothelial growth factor are already utilized for VS
   treatment (Zhang et al. [106]2018) and biomarkers from DCE-MRI are
   predictive of VS volume response to inhibition of vascular endothelial
   growth factor inhibition (Li et al. [107]2016a). It is also reported
   that cross-talk between VEGFA and HGF signaling pathways in VS
   highlights growth factor associated pathway as an additional important
   therapeutic target (Dilwali et al. [108]2015). The FOXO family of
   transcription factors has important functions in controlling cellular
   homeostasis, with FOXO1, FOXO3, and FOXO4 being ubiquitously expressed
   (Eijkelenboom and Burgering [109]2013; Webb and Brunet [110]2014).
   Recent evidence supports the hypothesis that FOXO could influence the
   function of the nervous system and be of great significance for
   researching some neurodegenerative diseases. Actually, FOXO1 is an
   essential regulator of vascular growth that couples metabolic and
   proliferative activities in endothelial cells. Endothelial-restricted
   deletion of FOXO1 in mice induces a profound increase in endothelial
   cells proliferation that interferes with coordinated sprouting, thereby
   causing hyperplasia and vessel enlargement. Conversely, forced
   expression of FOXO1 restricts vascular expansion and leads to vessel
   thinning and hypobranching (Wilhelm et al. [111]2016). SIRT1 is a class
   III histone deacetylase that regulates many cellular functions,
   including cell proliferation, apoptosis, and inflammatory responses
   (Brooks and Gu [112]2009; Li [113]2013). Several studies have shown
   that SIRT1 may promote tumorigenesis of glioma (Qu et al. [114]2012; Li
   et al. [115]2016b). Additionally, Qu’s group identified that SIRT1
   might be a promoter of glioma growth through the PTEN/PI3K/AKT
   signaling pathway (Qu et al. [116]2012).

Conclusions

   We compared the differences in gene expression between SVS and CVS and
   constructed miRNA–mRNA regulatory networks. The bioinformatics analysis
   revealed that the maps of apoptosis, cellular response to hypoxia, and
   the PI3K-Akt, AMPK, FOXO, and chemokine signaling pathway were
   significantly enriched. Of note, five hub genes including PTEN, FOXO1,
   FOXO3, VEGFA, and SIRT1 were identified, and they may contribute to the
   pathogenic and pathophysiological mechanisms of CVS formation. Further
   characterizing their biological functions and pathways may lift the
   veil of cystic formation at a molecular level and help to identify
   biomarkers for differential diagnosis and drug targets.

Electronic supplementary material

   [117]Supplementary Figure 1^ (8.3MB, pdf)

   Magnetic resonance imaging of representative cystic and solid
   vestibular schwannomas. (PDF 8523 kb)
   [118]Supplementary Figure S2^ (766.8KB, pdf)

   t-stochastic neighbor embedding (t-SNE) of sample profiles (n[1] = 12,
   n[2] = 17) revealed several clusters. Green: CVS. Orange: SVS. (PDF
   766 kb)

Authors’ contributions

   Conceived the project: Hao Wu and Zhihua Zhang; designed the
   experiments: Zhihua Zhang, Shuang Yan and Quan Wang; wrote the
   manuscript: Shuang Yan and Zirong Huo; provided platform supports: Hao
   Wu and Tao Yang; performed the experiments: Shuang Yan, Zirong Huo,
   Xiaoling Yin, and Zhaoyan Wang; and analyzed the data: Shuang Yan, Quan
   Wang, and Zirong Huo.

Funding information

   This work was supported by grants from the National Natural Science
   Foundation of China (Grant No. 81470681 and 81870712) and Shanghai
   Talent Development Funding Project (Grant No. 2017120).

Footnotes

   Publisher’s note

   Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in
   published maps and institutional affiliations.

   Shuang Yan, Quan Wang and Zirong Huo contributed equally to this work.

Contributor Information

   Zhihua Zhang, Email: zhihua.zhang2015@aliyun.com.

   Hao Wu, Email: wuhao622@sina.cn.

References
